Eskom executives on Thursday morning had to field a barrage of questions from members of a National Energy Regulator of SA (Nersa) panel about its 19.9% tariff hike application — which one described as grossly unfair to the South African public. Outside the hearings there was a vocal protest from a small group demanding free electricity for the poor. Nersa has held hearings around the country over the past month to allow businesses and individuals to air their views on the tariff application, which is for an increase of about three times the current consumer price inflation (CPI) rate. The hearings follow several months of shocking allegations of corruption and mismanagement at Eskom’s most senior management levels, resulting in the suspension of several executives. Eskom acting CEO Sean Maritz detailed a number of steps Eskom was taking to improve governance, including protecting whistle-blowers, independent lifestyle audits, terminating irregular supply contracts and taking disciplinary action. Eskom acting chief financial officer Calib Cassim said it was critical for Nersa to grant Eskom’s application for a 19.9% tariff hike because if Eskom could not plug the gap between its revenue and debt servicing costs, it was Treasury and ultimately the South African taxpayers who would have to pay. Nersa’s panel asked what Eskom would do to address its financial issues if it was a private sector business. They asked why it was continuing to maintain coal purchases despite falling electricity sales and a generation surplus of about 5,000MW, and whether any of the irregular expenditure was reflected in its application. One panel member, referring to Eskom’s claim that it performed well on cost competitiveness and price with electricity utilities in other countries, said the issue was whether South Africans could afford it. Maritz said if this was a private organisation he would maximise his tariff to make a profit and cut costs, but this was a state asset and it had to be sustainable for the country. He said Eskom was trying to drive efficiencies. It could cut costs and employee numbers but there were more costs to the country if it did not deliver electricity. Cassim said Eskom would address some of the more detailed questions in its conclusion on Monday. The hearings continue on Friday and have been extended to Monday because of the number of submissions received.