Cape Town’s water crisis arose in large measure because the city’s administration took advice from people who think they live in Europe. It shows why we need to decolonise engineering. The challenge for SA’s engineering professionals is to keep policy debates technically informed while contributing to the country’s transformation in a world that distrusts experts. To start, we must first acknowledge engineering’s colonial heritage and its impact. Arthur Lewis, the first and only black person to win the Nobel Prize for economics, wanted to become an engineer. He didn’t, because of the colonial colour bar in the West Indies. "I wanted to be an engineer," he said in his Nobel acceptance speech, "but this seemed pointless since neither the government nor the white firms would employ a black engineer." Lewis’s story shows how engineering in Europe’s colonies was affected by colonial racism. What could he have achieved as an engineer rather than an economist? What would he have been allowed to achieve? The profession’s history suggests that engineers were often colonialism’s implementers. The 1870 mission of the Institution of Civil Engineers — "directing the great sources of power in Nature for the use and convenience of man" — is about providing "the means of production and of traffic in states, both for external and internal trade", as well as constructing infrastructure "for the purposes of commerce". These are the profession’s colonial roots. Engineers built the roads up which the occupying forces advanced; laid the railway tracks to extract our raw materials to create their wealth. From the vantage point of economics, Lewis insisted that resource colonialism began as "an off-shoot of the transport revolutions. The railway was a major element here." Yet the profession has much to offer. From China to Ethiopia, engineers have led their countries through important transformations. The very words "to engineer" mean "to design and build" or "skilfully arrange for (something) to occur". Africa certainly needs to design and build a better future for its growing population, and to make it happen. It will not help if engineering is regarded as alien to African interests. Cape Town’s water problems offer a useful case study; water is a wonderfully patient teacher that, every year, offers new opportunities to understand it better. A growing city needs a reliable water supply to grow with it. Technicians review the needs, consider the options and seek to reconcile them. In 2007, long-running studies listed 40 supply options. In 2013, six of these were recommended to meet needs up to 2035. Expensive reuse and desalination options were at the bottom of the list, while reducing use rather than increasing supply has been an option since the 1980s. Cape Town’s approach closely mirrors Europe’s. It gives priority to conservation and ecosystems and rejects infrastructure-based solutions, as well as the science and practice that has kept most of urban SA water secure. This "colonised" approach contributed to the current crisis. It showed that water security is more about collective decision-making than technical issues. Current shortages are due more to human action (or inaction) than to variable rainfall. Engineers should have a critical role in keeping the political and social debates technically informed. But is that accepted? Definitions again: a professional is someone who is "engaged in one of the learned professions conforming to the technical or ethical standards of a profession", or "participating for gain or livelihood". Many engineers like that first definition. But in a material world, trust in professionals is limited, for good reason — doctors promote dubious medicines; accountants deliver misleading information; technical experts are often just hired hands promoting their employers’ interests. US President Donald Trump is a symptom, not the cause, of this distrust. Why should hydrologists, engineers and scientists be believed? Aren’t they just promoting their own careers? Haven’t they sometimes been wrong? In Asia’s "developmental states", technical specialists were given some autonomy from politicians to promote public goals. SA’s apartheid developmental state also created a community of technical professionals, which it trusted to promote its warped goals. This "production line" was lost as the state’s capacity collapsed and work was outsourced. Local consultancies now owned by international companies have little incentive to train young professionals who could become society’s "trusted experts". The situation has been aggravated by fears that professional organisations are closed clubs seeking to maintain exclusive privilege. The challenge for technical professionals in 21st century SA is that trust of "experts" derives from their "embeddedness" in their society, as well as their technical ability. Without that trust, politicians and communities don’t listen to advice and panic at the right time, but only react when crisis strikes. Cape Town’s decision makers were not telling lies when they claimed to have permanently reduced water consumption through demand management. But they ignored the weather and claimed an easy victory. Meanwhile, engineers failed to promote an alternative, cautionary view because they were not adequately "embedded" in the society. It is not just engineers whose expert advice is sometimes ignored. Arthur Lewis advised Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana not to build the Akosombo Dam because it would use too much of his country’s limited public funds. His advice was rejected. Not long after, Nkrumah was overthrown, not least because he did not have enough money to keep political peace between competing interests. In a world in which the role of technical expertise is increasingly challenged, decision-makers and their constituencies often prefer simpler and popular approaches. They ignore professionals with complex solutions to apparently simple tasks such as supplying water, especially if they are not effectively communicated. Ambivalent social attitudes further weaken engineers’ voices. However, while the profession needs continued introspection about its limited transformation and narrow social perspectives, new forces are shaping the future. The profession’s composition is changing rapidly; a dwindling group of white stalwarts is being succeeded by black counterparts who, over the next decade, will fill the gap of experienced "middle professionals". Many of today’s young engineers are gaining significant wisdom as they navigate their assignments in difficult circumstances with limited support. Their objectivity, ethical behaviour and technical competence will be tested. But their voices must be heard in the public debate. Cape Town’s tribulations show that a failure to listen is not the province of just one political party. So politicians too must learn to avoid the arrogance of ignorance and to harvest sound advice. Meanwhile, water will continue to teach us that its reliable flow is determined largely by people, not hydrology. Good decisions, at the right time, will be informed by sound advice, often coming from a cadre of engineers that is respected and trusted by its communities. That is where engineers should aim to find themselves. • Muller is with the Wits University School of Governance. This is an edited version of a South African Academy of Engineering Open Lecture he presented at the University of Cape Town.