The total value of the formal retail grocery sector rose from R394bn in 2014 to R453bn in 2017, Statistics SA says. To get a slice of this, Quickspaza is changing township consumers’ lives by turning the often stressful experience of shopping — transport to a store, long queues and transport home with heavy parcels to carry — into a simple process that involves ordering online via a mobile app, WhatsApp or SMS. "We are an online business selling hampers of basic food [and] cleaning, cosmetic and other products in Khayelitsha, Cape Town," says cofounder and joint CEO Paul Duval. "We deliver our products free to our customer’s house or shack in a branded tuk-tuk vehicle." In January 2014, the locally owned and community-focused company began as a mobile shop pilot study in Wallacedene and Bloekombos informal settlements on the eastern outskirts of Cape Town, with the first hub opening at Teguka Business Park on the border of Khayelitsha in May 2015. It targets consumers in LSM categories 1-7, who make up the largest and most valuable market in SA. In the 1970s, the apartheid government limited township stores to selling "basic-need" products. In the ’80s, spaza shops started trading illegally from township homes. They were legalised in the ’90s, leading to thousands springing up all over the country. Foreign nationals, in an influx in the early 2000s, took over many spaza shops and opened new ones. Added to the growth of shopping malls and chains on the outskirts of the townships, it led to a new retail boom. "Consumers now have access to mobile phones, smartphones, and tablets," Duval says. "This means that there is a high level of consumer price awareness via mobile-enabled social media platforms." And yet consumers can’t always get what they want — at least not from traditional supermarkets. On top of high fixed costs, high capital expenditure and low trading densities, they often offer consumers a fixed product range only. Quickspaza can use real-time consumer data to present customer-specific promotions, an adaptable product range and measurable and adjustable testing of its offerings. While supplier market-penetration data often end at wholesale or supermarket level, Quickspaza offers suppliers granular data of specific product sales at a specific GPS location or street address. And while suppliers and customers have limited opportunities to provide feedback to each other, data from Quickspaza’s many interactions with customers are captured on a digital platform that provides opportunities for market research, promotions and product launches. It also provides a simple low-cost route to market for new suppliers and local entrepreneurs. "Quickspaza has the unique ability to hypertarget marketing campaigns based on customer history, customer geolocation and customer buying patterns," joint CEO and head of operations Dawn Brosens says. "We know and understand the customer’s buying habits and record the customer buying history to use in targeting marketing campaigns. We also understand the customer’s need for direct communication via social media so we engage on Facebook and Twitter." The estimated cost to establish a "level 3" Quickspaza hub, accommodating 48 vehicles, is about R5.4m. At full capacity, estimated annual turnover from the hub amounts to R210m. The capital required to establish a bricks-and-mortar retail store capable of a similar turnover is multiples greater than this. Quickspaza hopes this low-capital model will attract investors when it lists on the 4AX exchange before year-end or early in 2018 with the aim of expanding the business to SA’s 45 largest townships. Duval says potential investors should adopt a long-term view of Quickspaza. Drawing analogies to Amazon, he says that hub operations are initially unprofitable, as it takes time to establish brand-recognition and consumer trust. The private equity market is "a challenging space in which to raise capital for a company like Quickspaza", Duval says. "So we are planning a listing on the 4AX exchange before year-end, or early in the new year, and are currently engaging with a number of private individuals, asset managers and other institutions to garner support for this process. We intend raising R100m via an issue of new ordinary shares in Quickspaza Holdings. Funds will be used to finance a 100-hub roll-out over a five-year period. "We also want to attract management talent, raise our profile, and facilitate a broader spread of ownership. The modularity of the business model, and the fact that the systems, branding, processes and procedures are centrally controlled, is a critical aspect of the Quickspaza strategy, because it is this that allows us to scale." The Quickspaza holding company will house four divisions. Quickspaza Buying will be responsible for stock procurement, while Quickspaza Digital will house the group’s digital assets. Quickspaza Facilities will house its physical assets including the fleet of tuk-tuk vehicles and its head office infrastructure, while Quickspaza Route to Market will contain hub operations. "Quickspaza drivers, brand ambassadors and other staff are engaged in multiple marketing initiatives to ensure constant communication with and feedback from the local community," Duval says. He admits it has "not been an easy journey to get the business to a point where we have sufficient confidence in our team and business model to raise outside capital". A clear vision that Quickspaza has the potential to drive much-needed fundamental change in the township economies has kept the team going through difficult times. "Quickspaza is committed to local community involvement and upliftment," Duval says. "We want to be the Alibaba and Amazon of the townships. "We will create employment opportunities in the communities and build an economic ecosystem that benefits all participants," he says. "Quickspaza hubs also provide the ideal incubation environment for training in a wide range of skills and jobs, and establishing a Quickspaza Academy is an important part of our immediate plans." The rapid adoption of smartphones in the country’s townships, together with falling data costs and the rise of mobile payments and related fintech offer the potential for major disruption of incumbent retail players’ business models. Duval wants Quickspaza to be at the forefront of that disruption. "It’s not about us as founders; it’s about what Quickspaza can do as a catalyst for improving the lives of township communities," Duval says.