Nine-time Irish champion Pat Smullen will need help from his teammates if he is to lead the visitors to victory in Sunday’s International Challenge. The winner of 25 grade1 races, including the 2016 Irish Derby on Harzand, Smullen has not drawn any standout mounts at the Turffontein track. However, he could possibly go close on four-year-old Dromedaris in the sixth race. Even so, Robbie Sage’s stayer is not one to risk too much of the rent money on as chances in this 3,000m handicap can be given to Sess — the mount of Melbourne Cup-winning jockey Corey Brown — and Geoff Woodruff’s runner Ali Bon Dubai, ridden by Martin Dwyer. In the opening international race — the fourth race — Smullen will be hoping that two runners from the Woodruff stable can run well for Seamie Heffernan and PJ Macdonald. The former partners Australian-bred newcomer Flaming Hot while stablemate Secret Portion made a promising debut over a shorter trip in October. The South African captain, Anthony Delpech, has drawn two plum rides — notably Sabina’s Dynasty, who can complete a hat-trick by once again beating Smullen’s mount Smokey Affair in the seventh race. The new owners of Sabina’s Dynasty must be amazed this daughter of Dynasty could not win a race in the Western Cape as she has looked very talented in her two outings for trainer Paul Peter. Mike de Kock’s filly Smokey Affair is better off at the weights compared to their clash three weeks ago, but Sabina’s Dynasty can come out on top to complete the three-timer. Delpech has also drawn to partner the Azzie stable’s progressive three-year-old Finding Troy in the first leg of the jackpot. This Go Deputy colt has been placed in each of his last three starts so is due to leave the maiden ranks. Brown has a shout on Gary Alexander’s representative, Royal Resolution, with Gavin Lerena hoping to have a say in the finish on the De Kock-trained Australian import Flexible Fugitive. Jockey PJ McDonald ended the 2017 UK season on a high last Saturday, winning the Gillies Fillies Stakes at Doncaster on Star Rock, and he can earn points for the overseas team when he rides Monarch Air for trainer David Nieuwenhuizen in the eighth race. French jockey Thierry Thulliez has an each-way chance on Monarch Air’s stablemate, Cinnamon Slew, while Salmon Run (Brown) and Wrap It Up (Dwyer) are on the short list of possible winners in the race.