Reinet Investments, the global investment company controlled by the Rupert family, is looking a little less reliant on its large tobacco holding. Half-year results to end-September released on Thursday showed Reinet’s significant minority shareholding in British American Tobacco (BAT) being reduced to 66.8% of the €5.4bn portfolio from 70.8% at the end of March in 2017. Reinet CEO Johann Rupert said the BAT share price on the London Stock Exchange decreased from £53 at the end of March to £46.72 at the end of September — resulting in a decrease in value of €485m. BAT’s carrying value was also affected by the weakening of the pound against the euro, he said. Some sentiment for BAT shares has been snuffed out by a recent announcement by the US Food and Drug Administration to pursue regulation requiring nicotine in cigarettes to be reduced to nonaddictive levels. UK-based financial services specialist Pension Insurance Corporation Group (PensCorp) — Reinet’s second-largest investment — accounted for 22.4% of the portfolio value at the end of September compared with 19.6% at the end of March. PensCorp provides risk management solutions in the form of tailored pension insurance buyouts and buy-ins to UK-defined benefit pension funds. At the end of June, PensCorp had £24.2bn in financial investments (£22.6bn at end-December 2016) and had insured more than 145,000 pension fund members (end-December: 134,900). Reinet disclosed that PensCorp increased operating profits 18% to £93m for the six months to end-June, writing £1.9bn of premiums. Reinet’s investment in PensCorp was deemed worth just more than €1.2bn on a fair value basis — an increase of about 3% compared with end-March. Rupert said the increase in the estimated fair value was due to increases in comparable company valuation multiples derived from information relating to listed companies in the UK insurance sector as well as an increase in embedded value. One of the biggest changes in value was Reinet’s holding in the real estate hub under US Land Development and Mortgages. The group’s investment in real estate development projects in Florida, Georgia, Colorado, North and South Carolina and Nevada shrank by a third to €100m (previously €150m). Rupert said the current valuation was based on unaudited financial statements for the financial year to end-June and adjusted for cash movements up to the end of September. The decrease in the estimated fair value reflected reductions in the expected rate of lot sales and lot prices, and revised future expenses. The decrease also reflected the weakening of the dollar against the euro. hasenfussm@fm.co.za