The Department of Defence had financial misstatements amounting to billions of rand, while it incurred more than R400m in irregular expenditure, and recorded fruitless and wasteful expenditure amounting to R303m in 2016-17. Its error-riddled financial statements earned it a qualified audit opinion. Auditor-general Kimi Makwetu painted a damning picture of the finances of Defence Minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula’s department, saying this had been reflected in unreliable record-keeping, which resulted in his office not being able to complete its audit and determine the true extent of irregular expenditure incurred. The International Standard of Auditing 450 — drafted by the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants — defines a misstatement as a difference between disclosure reported in financial statements and the disclosure required in order for an item to be in line with the financial reporting framework. This can come about as a result of fraud or error. Makwetu said he was unable to perform a complete audit process to confirm the full amount of irregular expenditure for lack of supporting documents, which the department was supposed to supply. "Irregular expenditure to the amount of R419m was not disclosed in the disclosure note [accompanying] ... the financial statements, as required by Treasury regulations of the [Public Finance Management Act]." Makwetu gave the department a qualified audit opinion because of its inaccurate disclosure of moveable tangible assets. He found that its stated tangible capital of R57.6bn was misstated by R1.3bn and its immovable capital assets of R3.5bn by R1.5bn. Fruitless and wasteful expenditure to an amount of R303m was incorrectly reported as resolved. "I was also not provided with a register of investigations at the department during the audit. Consequently, I could not perform audit procedures to confirm the completeness of fruitless and wasteful expenditure," Makwetu said. He was unable to obtain further audit evidence for intangible assets or verify assets under the care of the department. Makwetu added the department to the long list of errant clients that often failed to pay within 30 days. "Payables, which exceed the payment term of 30 days as required in Treasury regulations, amount to R102.9m. This amount, in turn, exceeds the voted funds to be surrendered of R39.3m — as per the statement of financial performance — by R65.3m." Defence secretary Sam Gulube told Business Day that the department’s problematic asset register system had come about as a result of fragmented IT systems, which it wanted to centralise before the release of its 2017-18 annual report. The goal was to centralise the asset register by the end of the 2017-18 financial year, he said. "The [various] ... assets were in different IT systems. We are still battling to integrate them into one. We were qualified because we should have integrated them by now," he said. Gulube maintained that the department had provided its investigation reports to the auditor-general, but not within the deadline and the information had been insufficient to be of aid to Makwetu. magubanek@businesslive.co.za