Business and individual tax head Jonas Makwakwa’s woes at the South African Revenue Service (SARS) are set to continue with the Hawks confirming they are still investigating him. Anticorruption organisation Corruption Watch is also considering legal action over the R1.2m suspicious and unusual transactions in his personal bank accounts and that of his partner, Kelly-Ann Elskie, who is also a SARS employee. These allegations feature prominently in a Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC) report. This was after SARS had cleared Makwakwa and Elskie of all charges and lifted their suspensions. Makwakwa returned to work at SARS on November 1. SARS had commissioned international law firm Hogan Lovells to investigate the transactions, but the firm said in a statement the scope of its investigation was "limited" and it did not "directly investigate the financial transactions identified by the FIC", raising questions about the duo’s return to work. Hogan Lovells said that "all criminal related allegations arising from the FIC report were referred to the relevant authorities for investigation". Hawks spokesman Hangwani Mulaudzi confirmed on Sunday that the directorate’s serious economic offences unit was still investigating the case. Corruption Watch director David Lewis said questions remained whether the suspension of Makwakwa and Elskie should have been lifted while investigations into the matter were still continuing. "[SARS boss Tom] Moyane is implying that SARS had done the disciplinary process, so there are no more question marks hanging over Makwakwa and Elskie’s heads ... but, in fact, it is clear that what is still hanging over their heads ... is possible criminal charges," Lewis said. Corruption Watch had laid criminal charges against the pair in 2016 and also against Moyane for allegedly attempting to shield them. Lewis said Corruption Watch was now considering its legal options to possibly obtain copies of the report by Hogan Lovells and also the final report on the disciplinary process. Questions were also being asked whether the outcome of the internal disciplinary process against the pair was reviewable, Lewis said. marriann@businesslive.co.za