The South African Revenue Service’s (SARS’s) efforts to exonerate itself over its handling of allegations against its second-in-command, Jonas Makwakwa, has opened it to further scrutiny regarding suspicious and unusual transactions in his account identified by the Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC). In a statement on Monday SARS said the investigation its commissioner, Tom Moyane, commissioned in 2016 looked into whether any misconduct was committed by Makwakwa and his partner, Kelly-Anne Elskie, also a SARS employee. The FIC report detailed that R1.2m had been transferred into the bank accounts of the pair from 2010 to 2016. It said Makwakwa and Elskie "may have been involved in or facilitated corrupt activities". The report indicated that credits in Makwakwa’s accounts increased 152% yearly from 2010 and it identified 75 unusual and suspicious cash deposits from March 2010 to January 2016. SARS said it had investigated only whether there had been misconduct and had left the criminal investigation to the relevant authorities. The criminal matter is being investigated by the Hawks serious economic offences unit. The probe has not been concluded but the pair returned to work at the beginning of November. SARS accused the media of displaying "a lack of understanding of the difference between a misconduct investigation by an employer and a criminal investigation". When Moyane announced the probe in October 2016, he said Hogan Lovells would "investigate the matter", referring to the suspicious and unusual transactions. He did not at the time specify that the law firm would only probe whether there was misconduct and would leave the transactions to law enforcement agencies. "As an employer, Mr Moyane’s jurisdiction only goes as far as determining whether or not there is any misconduct related to the employment relationship. The responsibility to pursue criminal charges in a court of law lies with the National Prosecuting Authority based on investigations by the SAPS or DPCI (Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation)," the SARS statement said. "Given the outcome of the SARS disciplinary process and the fact that no decision had been taken by DPCI on whether or not Mr Makwakwa should be criminally prosecuted at that time, Mr Moyane was advised that there was no legal justification for SARS not to lift Mr Makwakwa’s suspension." It blamed the media for "misrepresenting facts", saying it was not true that Hogan Lovells did not probe the suspicious transactions the FIC identified and it was also not true that the law firm had issued a media statement to this effect. This is despite a statement on Hogan Lovells’s website, which says that due to the "limited scope" of its investigation it "did not seek to directly investigate the financial transactions identified by the FIC". SARS said the transactions were "put to Makwakwa to respond and he did. It was those responses which led to Hogan Lovells concluding that an act of misconduct could not be found from the transactions and their sources." Hogan Lovells did not respond to requests for comment. MarrianN@Businesslive.co.za