The ANC will this week be pushing to finalise processes ahead of what is expected to be a fiercely contested elective conference in December. Provinces were given until Sunday to finalise branch general meetings. The ANC is expected to provide an update on the process on Monday. Branch nominations will be sealed and then presented at provincial general councils, which are expected to conclude by the end of the week. The ANC in the Free State will hold its provincial elective conference from Friday to Sunday in Parys, where Ace Magashule — who is said to be backing President Jacob Zuma’s former wife Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma to take over the leadership of the party — will square off against his deputy, Thabo Manyoni, for the position of provincial chairman. The conference will also consolidate branch nominations for the December conference. Thursday is the deadline for Zuma to make fresh representations to the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) on why he should not face corruption charges. The NPA has also given the Hawks until then to check the availability of 218 witnesses in the matter. Attention will also be on the situation in Zimbabwe this week as interim President Emmerson Mnangagwa enters his first week in charge. On Tuesday and Wednesday, the DA will hold an economic policy workshop chaired by former leader Tony Leon. The public has until Thursday to make submissions to the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (Saica) as part of its investigation into the conduct of any member of Saica employed by KPMG. In Parliament on Tuesday, the mineral resources committee will hear from minister Mosebenzi Zwane on state capture allegations. The standing committee on public accounts will on Tuesday hold a hearing on Transnet contracts, as well as on its deviations and expansions. The standing committee on finance will be briefed by the South African Revenue Service (SARS) on its annual report. MPs are likely to question officials on the circumstances around the reinstatement of SARS second-in-command Jonas Makwakwa. On Wednesday, newly appointed national police commissioner General Khehla Sitole is likely to make his first appearance in Parliament when SAPS briefs the portfolio committee on police on the festive season’s operations. The standing committee on finance will be briefed by SAA on its quarterly report. The Department of Public Service and Administration will brief MPs on the progress made with regard to the government employee housing scheme and financial injection towards housing for state employees. phakathib@businesslive.co.za