Am I being pessimistic, or do events surrounding the ANC’s December conference reveal some odd patterns? Consider the recent critique of presidential candidate Cyril Ramaphosa’s decision to reveal his slate. The argument, made by secretary-general Gwede Mantashe and picked up gleefully by Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma’s supporters, maintains that Ramaphosa engages in "slate politics" at the expense of ANC branches’ right to choose. But that doesn’t ring true. I suspect that "re-empowerment of the branches" is another way for Mantashe to beat his preferred drum that ANC communitarian decision-making trumps public consultation. Or, plainly put, that secrecy in policymaking is preferable to transparency. But secrecy hasn’t worked for the ANC government. In fact, it might be its undoing. After all, has anybody considered that the "re-empowerment of branches" is just spin? For example, we are told the ANC recorded its objections to "slate politics" in 2015. But is it coincidence that the timing could help certain individuals win December’s election unfairly? Re-empowering the branches moves the decision-making power, conveniently, to exactly that many "secret" wormholes around the country. The branches usually lack their own headquarters, so gather at venues that are closed to outsiders and the media. Secondly, is it chance that this process generates a small and defined set of locations that can be targeted and monitored in person? Were I a commander skilled in, say, developing cadre networks, surely I would have realised that if my cadres control just 51% of about 4,000 branches, I could control the party. If I could ensure that meetings in just 2001 venues went my way, I could win the country of 50-million people. If somebody did that math, then the serendipity of David Mabuza’s emergence from Mpumalanga’s branch general meetings with 150 new branches seems almost expected. Indeed, since Mabuza was (allegedly) never far from Jacob Zuma, the "unity" campaign he initiated starts to seem like a smokescreen; it was always going to be abandoned to let him support Zuma at last. It also makes sense that Mabuza’s branch general meetings happened so absurdly early that the public paid them no attention. Grumbles of impropriety in voting processes seem like hearsay without facts. In similar ways do the antics of the KwaZulu-Natal provincial executive committee make sense. Its process of allegedly dissolving some branches that choose Ramaphosa could be following an arithmetic tally. Also unsurprising is some KwaZulu-Natal metro police departments’ involvement in keeping out "rogues" who arrive singing Ramaphosa songs. Were I worried about my inability to police the alleged "state capturers", I might prefer a Zuma in place next year too. But again, why at only some branch general meetings? These examples could lead one to believe such acts are calculated. And one could tie them to more disparate events. For example, Zuma using his Oliver Tambo centenary speech to eulogise Russia’s role in the collapse of apartheid — and imply that this means to dismiss the nuclear deal is to support "the West" — can be turned towards the building narrative. The nuclear deal is now connected — also recently by Energy Minister David Mahlobo — to the reduction of unemployment. It follows that resistance to the nuclear deal perpetuates apartheid mores such as prevention of work. "The West" is cast as the supporter of those mores — skipping over the massive role it played in apartheid’s collapse — and the Russians repainted as the single long-standing anti-apartheid heroes. Members can thus be told that the nuclear deal equals increased prosperity for their communities and (pertinently) each member there. All just in time for "radical economic transformation" of "white monopoly capital", which aligns well to "communism", since it appeals to the rising popular interest in communal ownership after the 20-year failed attempt at trickle-down capitalism. In short, the R1-trillion nuclear deal becomes a carrot for branch general meeting delegates with one eye on their own future. After all, as several commentators noted recently, it seems barmy to try to fast-track the nuclear deal when it can easily be blocked in court. But it makes sense when recast as a component of an election the Zuma camp is planning to win. That scenario then has implications for the geopolitical balance. Steered by the (allegedly) kleptocratic but charming President Vladimir Putin, the Russian Federation has emerged from the ruins of the Soviet empire as a powerful alternative to the two current economic models. We now have a triple choice between US capitalism, Chinese capito-communism — which President Xi Jinping announced recently is to be propounded abroad as a philosophy — and charismatic sovereigns. Sure, the latter grouping currently contains few criminals, but once their subjects accept that they own everything they become legitimate old-style kings, tsars or chiefs. Even the Saudi royals’ relations with Russia are reputedly warming as Saudi-US relations are cooling. That means control of central places will be as important as ever. In the 20th century, SA was positioned to control maritime traffic between the Indian and Atlantic oceans. Nowadays, anyone who controls SA also gains a portal to the rest of Africa, if only via the AU’s links to other African criminocrats. They would also control most of the world’s platinum, in effect controlling hydrogen fuel cell technology. That means there is huge money to be made by sovereigns and their networks. Were I looking to buy a country, I would consider a couple of thousand informal gatherings in community halls, and ultimately just 2001 delegates, as a really cheap investment. The obvious vulnerability is that by the ANC’s rules delegates can "exercise judgment" at the conference, and even change their minds once. So all nominations will be reconsidered at the conference. Giving 2001 members each as much as R1m would amount to just more than R2bn, but since winning the election virtually guarantees a nuclear build worth at least R1-trillion, that’s still a return of 500:1. And since R2bn is a pittance for big criminocratic countries (whichever they may be), the chance might be tempting. Heck, even the Guptas could afford a couple of billion. Given those possibilities, it’s again a concern that the process seems organised in advance. Ramaphosa said six months ago that money had "started to change hands", which "must not happen". But if a few criminals have deep pockets, it is going to happen. And the state capture brigade has demonstrated that it plans ahead. Indeed, here one finds evidence for a plan everywhere. Why would Dlamini-Zuma have been taken to fund-raising events by cigarette smugglers? After all, what could cigarette smugglers possibly offer rural branches? Why did Ajay Gupta allegedly ask that Eskom’s Matshela Koko disciplinary hearing happen "after December 2017"? Because he’ll have said sayonara by then? Possibly. Or maybe he expects to be in a stronger position. So it turns out that not only does SA stand to lose the voting freedom it gained in 1994, but the world stands ready to tip into a tripartite order that undoes the 20th century binary choice between capitalism and communism. And yet "empowerment of the branches" means there is little the public can do. If SA’s democracy survives the December conference, the ANC should relook the vulnerability it created by its nomination process and vestigial revolutionary culture. Until then, it will be up to the character of ANC members in branches. That there have been such acts of character and courage is indisputable. One can only ask such members, should they read this, to urge that the delegates follow the will of their branches and not sell the country to the highest bidder. The irony is that such bidders are likely to be white, and definitely foreign, which will be a terrible way to end a revolution against colonisation. But for business and other parties, these scenarios repaint our choices. It is currently a widespread opinion that the worst outcome would be deferral of the conference, but it rather seems the worst outcome would be insisting that the conference continue if the voting has been indisputably compromised. It won’t matter that Dlamini-Zuma has a high "repellent factor" in general — any party that wins by dishonesty now will simply rig the 2019 elections too. However, investigating results that appear illegitimate would cast the process back to the branches, where the genuine will of the members can be rescrutinised. If so, we should welcome all legal challenges, by any camp. One can assume that those attempting diversions will be disproven by facts. Holding the branch general meeting processes to the highest standards of probity will be worth it, since otherwise past questionable actions will be cast in stone. And there is nothing Zuma could do while we wait that he couldn’t do now. At least democracy will survive. Of course, all these connections are just hypotheses. Maybe there’s no such nefarious plan and people are more trustworthy than they seem. The pessimist in me, however, cautions that to keep optimism over a positive outcome alive we should let go of our implausible assumption that in an election everyone suddenly starts to play fair. • Galetti is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Johannesburg and Yale University in New Haven.