S&P’s downgrade, which has placed SA firmly in junk status with the agency, is a huge blow to SA’s fragile economic growth prospects, according to the CEO Initiative, which was established under former Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan. In a statement following the ratings announcements on Friday, the initiative said: "While this downgrade does not cause SA’s government debt to be excluded from the World Government Bond Index, it will likely lead to capital outflows at a time when our country needs it most. "It is especially concerning as the local currency downgrade affects approximately 90% of the government’s debt, of which an estimated 40% is currently held by foreigners who have invested in our country. It pointed out that the downgrade came in response to the sharply rising trajectory of the levels of government debt and fiscal deficits spelled out in the medium-term budget policy statement (MTBPS). The initiative expected the downgrade to put further strain on the record-low levels of business and consumer confidence. Jabu Mabuza, Convenor of the CEO Initiative, said: "All the negative ratings actions that the country has suffered so far could and should have been avoided, had the required structural reforms necessary to underpin sustained and inclusive economic growth been implemented in the interests of all South Africans. "The CEO Initiative has spent much time over the last few months working with government and labour in developing a plan on what was required to avoid these downgrades, but little has been implemented and – if anything – we saw political and policy uncertainty increase." Despite this, Mabuza said the CEO Initiative remained committed improving SA’s credit rating. "It will require ethical and inspirational leadership by business, government and labour that puts the interests of SA ahead of personal or factional interests … We must work together to regain our investment grade ratings as a foundation for growing our economy and reducing unemployment." Of utmost importance, he added, was that the 2018 budget statement contained strong measures on cost containment and structural reforms.