As the dust settles after Minister of Finance Malusi Gigaba delivered the medium-term budget policy statement, South Africans are looking around to fathom where it leaves them. Initial reactions in the sensitive rand and local fixed-income markets were ominous. The rand sold off 6.5%, the 10-year bond yield jumped from 8.85% to 9.42% and short-term interest rate futures moved from discounting a declining rate cycle to a hike within months. A widespread reaction was that S&P Global Ratings would have no choice but to downgrade SA’s sovereign debt rating on November 24, with Moody’s and Fitch sure to follow in 2018. The ratings downgrade bandwagon was about to move up another notch, as has been seen in other emerging markets. However, there were some caveats. Some said that the ANC’s elective conference in December was such a critical event, with potentially binary outcomes, that the rating agencies might wait. A more charitable assessment of Gigaba’s presentation was that it was candid, simply exposing the realities of the deteriorating fiscal arithmetic. The objective was to reveal openly to the nation, and particularly the politicians, that things were bad and getting worse — something needed to be done. Such a charitable view may have some merit. After all, for several years, under Pravin Gordhan and ministers before him, the medium-term budget policy statement has been something of a fiction. It always presented data in the out-years (years two and three) of a budget deficit declining as a percentage of GDP, of debt to GDP stabilising and of the primary balance (after interest payments) moving into surplus. However, these happy objectives were never met. There was something of a Groundhog Day feel to the budgets. Yet the markets tended to tolerate this because the statement was always presented in a way that instilled confidence in the ability and competence of the Treasury to keep control and to take necessary steps. No such pretence was offered in Gigaba’s policy statement. However, if we are to accept the view that he was merely being candid, we must still ask what he intends to do about it. It is clear that by the 2018 annual budget presentation in February, holes will need to be plugged. Not least of these is a R51bn gap between spending and revenue, which could be an underestimate, given the weak state of the economy. If Gigaba does not address the holes in his budget, SA must look to the consequences. It matters not one whit whether there is state capture, whether President Jacob Zuma stands or falls, or who is the new ANC president. SA is just one country among a host of other emerging economies that rely on the approbation or otherwise of foreign investors. It has been on a slippery slope for some years. Local business confidence is at its lowest point since the global financial crisis of 2008-09. Fixed investment by the private sector — the wellspring of economic growth and jobs — has fallen since 2014. When a country has a government bond interest rate well above its nominal GDP growth rate (including inflation), its fiscal metrics compound downwards and a "debt trap" looms. This process is negatively reinforced by the ratings agencies, which set the bar for foreign investors in the affected country. That is why it is unusual for a country to avoid serial downgrades: there are usually several in the same direction before things turn around. There are quite a few countries that could be studied for guidance. One is Brazil, which had several downgrades from 2014 to 2017 during years of economic mismanagement. It now stands at BB with a negative outlook, three notches below investment grade. During the worst of the crisis, Brazilian GDP contracted 10% over the period 2013-17. By comparison, the worst SA has seen is a 2.5% contraction in 2009. Brazilian consumer inflation topped 10% in 2015 as its budget deficits surged from 5% to nearly 9% of GDP (SA’s is 4%) and short-term interest rates rose above 14%. Over the past year, Brazil has finally started to respond to the sour medicine it had to take. Inflation has plunged to just 2% and interest rates have fallen back to 7%. But GDP has barely started to turn back up. Another example is Argentina. Now six notches below investment grade, it has elected a conservative government charged with turning the economy around. But this is only after years of highly volatile growth, including severe GDP contractions in 2014 and 2016, and an inflation rate well over 30%. The government of Mauricio Macri, elected in 2015 and endorsed again in legislative elections in October, is struggling with inflation of more than 20% and a big budget deficit (6% of GDP). True, GDP has turned the corner, with 3% growth predicted in 2018, but more years of austerity lie ahead as the economy attempts to wrench its flimsy fiscal arithmetic back into balance. Despite its struggles, Argentina was recently able to place a 100-year foreign currency bond in the eurobond market at a yield of less than 8%. The foreign investor community has looked kindly on the new government’s efforts to reform the economy. Indeed, over the past two years, SA has also been the fortunate beneficiary of strong demand by foreign investors for its local and foreign currency bonds, with the locals offering juicy yields of 7%-9%. In a world where yield is hard to find in developed countries, emerging markets have become very popular. But this is a cyclical phenomenon — emerging market flows are fickle. If SA does not attend to its fiscal arithmetic soon, it will be doubly vulnerable when the emerging market tide peaks and recedes. So the question is, is SA to continue on the slippery slope? That would be one where the fiscal numbers continue to deteriorate, ratings downgrades continue, foreigners provide funding but only at ever-higher rates, the rand weakens further, inflation reignites and the Reserve Bank is forced to hike the repo rate. The implications for growth, employment and political distress hardly need to be spelt out. As has been seen across emerging markets, badly managed economies are able to limp along, there are always lenders at a price. But, eventually, a crisis ensues and action has to be taken. Both the decline and the muti needed to heal are painful and drawn out. In such an environment the social fabric becomes severely stressed. • Bell is an investment professional at Old Mutual Investment Group.