The ANC in Johannesburg has filed an application in the high court to have the council’s Integrated Development Plan (IDP) reviewed and set aside. The IDP is crucial in the budgeting process as it sets out the municipality’s goals and development plans, which in turn need to be aligned with the available resources. The allocation of funds in the budget needs to be aligned with the priorities in the plan. The application in the High Court in Johannesburg was filed last week, ahead of a high-stakes council meeting set for this week. The meeting could result in the ANC trying to oust mayor Herman Mashaba and speaker Vasco da Gama through no-confidence motions. ANC Joburg spokesman Jolidee Matongo said the party had pointed out "material flaws" in the development plan process prior to its roll-out and after the public consultation. "At the council meeting that dealt with the IDP item, the ANC put on record its concerns about the exclusion of the majority of residents in the IDP consultation meetings. We indicated that the use of the JMPD [Johannesburg metropolitan police] to eject residents from the meetings demonstrated the resolve of Mashaba to exclude those that have a different view to him and the DA," Matongo said. He told Business Day that it would affect the budget if the plan was set aside. Mashaba, however, said in a statement on Sunday that the ANC’s action was "nothing short of an attempt at undermining our residents’ will". Mashaba said the coming motions against him and Da Gama were an attempt by the ANC to "enrich themselves at the expense of residents". He accused the ANC of disrupting public meetings on the development plan. Mashaba said the city had reached out to more than 8,000 residents in the development plan consultations, "compared to 3,000 under the ANC". The city had also received more than 1,000 written submissions and more than 2,000 interactions on social media platforms. Da Gama said the ANC could not claim to be committed to fighting corruption while seeking to conceal corruption within its own ranks. He said the council had a duty to ensure that all councillors within the city acted in the best interest of its residents. "This baseless court action cannot be separated from the ANC’s motion of no confidence as they seek to reinstall ANC leadership that would continue to cover up such criminal acts," Da Gama said. However, Matongo countered by saying that Da Gama was unacquainted with the rules of council. These rules clearly stipulated the procedures that should take place for raising contempt or breach of privilege claims by councillors, Matongo said. mailovichc@businesslive.co.za