London — Investors tentatively returned to world stock markets on Thursday, looking for bargains after Europe’s longest losing streak of the year and the worst run since March for the top global indices. After five consecutive daily losses on the MSCI index of world stocks and seven straight falls in Europe, there was a bounce of sorts. Benchmark indices in Tokyo, Shanghai and Hong Kong and Seoul all rallied overnight, while London, Frankfurt and Paris started 0.3%-0.4% higher as cyclical stocks that had driven the sell-off made a comeback. There was some relief too that oil prices had pulled out of what had been an almost 5% drop and that upbeat US data on Wednesday had helped the dollar halt the euro’s sharp recent rise. "After five or six days of steady selling you have got people coming back in looking for bargains," said CMC Markets senior analyst Michael Hewson. "I think it’s temporary, though. We haven’t had a significant sell-off this year and the fact of the matter is that equity markets have done so much better than anyone dared to envisage." Bond markets, meanwhile, were seeing a broad rise in yields after mostly upbeat US economic news on Wednesday had added to the expectation that the Federal Reserve will hike interest rates again next month as well as multiple times next year. Two-year treasury yields crept to fresh nine-year peaks in European trading, although the US yield curve remained at its flattest in a decade. European yields nudged higher too but the standout there was a fall in the premium investors demand to hold French debt over German peers to its lowest in two-and-a-half years, and almost to record lows, on the optimism about reforms under Emmanuel Macron. "The fact that the ECB [European Central Bank] extended QE [quantitative easing] by nine months helps create the appetite for semi-core debt and also it looks very attractive for Japanese investors as an alternative to US treasuries," said ING strategist Martin van Vliet. The liveliest moves in Asia had come in Japan, where the Nikkei turned around early losses to surge 1.5% as investors returned after a six-day losing streak there. There were 0.6%-0.8% gains for Shanghai and Hong Kong and Seoul, while Australian stocks added 0.2% as data showed the country’s unemployment rate at its lowest since early 2013. Wall Street e-mini futures for the S&P 500 also pointed to a rebound in US markets later. All the major indices had dropped on Wednesday with the energy sector suffering a four-day decline of 4%, its weakest such period in 14 months. Investor concern over the progress of a massive US tax reform plan showed no sign of abating as two Republican legislators on Wednesday criticised the Senate’s latest proposal. US President Donald Trump hit back, tweeting that "Tax cuts are getting close!" "If we look at what the markets are focusing on, it’s still very much the tax cut debates in the US, and how much progress there’s going to be on this front," said Mitul Kotecha, head of Asia macro strategy for Barclays in Singapore. The dollar index, which tracks the greenback against a basket of six major rivals, was slightly higher on the day at 93.828 having hit four- and five-week lows against the yen and euro. The euro was down around 14 ticks at $1.1777, retreating from a one-month top of $1.1860 on Wednesday. Doubts that the latest round of talks on the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) will make much headway in the face of tough US demands saw Mexico’s peso sink to an eight-month low, although it steadied in Asian and European trade. In commodity markets, gold edged down 0.1% to $1,277.29/oz. It reached $1,289.09 overnight, its highest since October 20. Oil prices gained despite pressure after the US government reported an unexpected increase in crude and petrol stockpiles. They had lost ground to this week’s International Energy Agency (IEA) outlook for slower growth in global crude demand. US crude added 5c to $55.38 a barrel. Brent crude futures were 15c higher at $62.02. Reuters