As the chief investment officer of a fund manager with a substantial investment in Naspers, I have been engaging with chairman Koos Bekker since July regarding the ANN7 "news channel" carried by MultiChoice, a company controlled by Naspers. Despite us raising legitimate concerns over the relationship between ANN7 and Naspers and MultiChoice, we have been unable to get an undertaking that the matter will be re-examined. In fact, Bekker ended his last e-mail to me with the words: "I’m afraid I can’t help you and am terminating this discussion." I now note with alarm that some of the concerns we raised with him are the subject of media reports. These articles appear to allege or imply that MultiChoice made payments to ANN7 (at the time owned by the Gupta family) to incentivise the channel or the Guptas to influence government communications policy. These reports are damaging to the reputation of MultiChoice and Naspers and, if true, expose the group to potential legal sanction. As a Naspers shareholder and South African, I find this situation distressing. Below is a summary of how we arrived at this unfortunate juncture. The decision by the commercial banks in SA to close the accounts of most Gupta entities was likely taken only after serious compliance issues became apparent. It should therefore have been obvious that to maintain any relationship with an entity owned by the Guptas carried unnecessary risks. With these risks in mind, I wrote to Bekker in his capacity as Naspers chairman because I thought he needed to be made aware of these concerns and would want to investigate the matter further. I asked specifically if he had investigated how ANN7 was funded (starting a satellite news channel is a capital-intensive undertaking). I asked about the nature of the group’s relationship with ANN7, and that it ensure there was no aspect that could damage Naspers’s reputation. I stressed that Bekker carried the responsibility for corporate governance at Naspers and for protecting the group’s reputation. He deflected my inquiry to MultiChoice CEO Imtiaz Patel. I replied, saying this was a corporate governance matter and not an operational matter. Obviously, in general, if operational management has somehow transgressed we can hardly rely on it for assurances that no such transgression exists. Meloy Horn, the head of Naspers investor relations, then contacted me at Bekker’s behest and I again stressed that this was not a matter for the investor relations team but something he as chairman should address. I did, however, ask Horn if Naspers would consider conducting a probe into the relationship with, and funding of, ANN7. On August 17, I wrote to Bekker again and formally requested as shareholders that he table our previously stated concerns over the relationship with ANN7 at a Naspers board meeting. In his reply of September 6, he said the board "will discuss this amongst many other issues". In September, we again corresponded, and I asked if the board had debated the matter and what it concluded. Bekker did not confirm that the board had debated this matter, but replied that "MultiChoice is a separate company to Naspers". Of course, this is true, but when you own 80% of a firm it is self-evident that you have pretty much complete control over what this subsidiary does. Naspers elected to allow MultiChoice to continue the relationship with ANN7. As noted above, Bekker then unilaterally terminated our correspondence. Left with no further ability to engage with him privately, I now write this article in the hope it will be the catalyst for some contemplation on the part of the Naspers board. Naspers releases its interim results on Wednesday and perhaps this would be a good time for Bekker to directly address the issues raised in the media around MultiChoice’s relationship with ANN7. I suggest an independent inquiry into this matter would be welcomed by Naspers shareholders and South Africans in general. Sans such an investigation, what are shareholders, customers and citizens of SA to infer? Perhaps there would be a greater incentive to pay heed to the concerns of shareholders if it were not for Naspers’s unusual shareholding structure, where a few shareholders (including Bekker himself) with a limited economic interest in Naspers control the majority of shareholder votes. Bekker has many great accomplishments in his career, but he is surely not proud of the way he has ignored mounting evidence that the group’s commercial relationship with the Guptas (via MultiChoice) is damaging to Naspers and SA. • Watkins is with All Weather Capital, a fund manager that acts for local and international investors, including sovereign wealth funds. It has more than R1bn invested in Naspers.