Malibongwe Maketa has reiterated his full commitment to the Warriors until the end of the Ram Slam T20 Challenge. The 37-year-old Maketa‚ recently announced as the new Proteas assistant coach to Ottis Gibson‚ said his main focus was to help the Warriors lift the trophy before he left the franchise in December. Maketa led the Warriors to the final of this tournament last season when they lost to the Titans at SuperSport Park. "My goal has always been to guide the Warriors to a domestic trophy and that goal remains very much on my agenda‚" Maketa said on Tuesday. The Warriors play the Dolphins at Kingsmead Stadium on Wednesday, and Maketa said his motivation and commitment to the team had never changed. Looking ahead to the clash against the Dolphins‚ Maketa said: "We are disappointed because we didn’t take advantage of the matches against the Knights and Titans at home and that has left us sitting at the bottom of the table. "We don’t want to have a scenario where we reach the last few games and we have to win at all costs and have to rely on others for favours." Dolphins coach Grant Morgan said while he had respect for the Warriors‚ his team should be able to beat their visitors as his side were playing at home. The Warriors have won 11 of their 19 meetings, but Morgan said they were confident of getting the win. "We respect the Warriors and they are a side that has punched above their weight in the last few years‚" Morgan said. "I truly feel if they come with 100% and we come with 100%‚ and with the personnel we have on deck — and this is with all due respect, taking nothing away from them — then we should, man for man, be able to have them‚" Morgan said. The Dolphins made a storming start to the competition when they beat the Cape Cobras in record fashion in their opening game. But they have since had a washout and then lost to the Highveld Lions. TimesLIVE Dolphins squad: Khayelihle Zondo (capt)‚ Sarel Erwee‚ Morne van Wyk‚ Dane Vilas‚ Sibonelo Makhanya‚ Andile Phehlukwayo‚ Robert Frylinck‚ Keshav Maharaj‚ Prenelan Subrayen‚ Athi Maposa‚ Eathan Bosch‚ Mthokozisi Shezi‚ Imran Tahir. Warriors squad: Jon-Jon Smuts (capt)‚ Colin Ackermann‚ Andrew Birch‚ Gihahn Cloete‚ Colin Ingram‚ Christiaan Jonker‚ Sisanda Magala‚ Lesiba Ngoepe‚ Anrich Nortje‚ Jerry Nqolo‚ Solo Nqweni‚ Kelly Smuts‚ Yaseen Vallie‚ Basheer Walters.