Brisbane — Man-of-the-match Steve Smith vowed on Monday that Australia would continue to play hard, aggressive cricket right through the Ashes series after smashing England in the first Test here. Openers David Warner and Cameron Bancroft sealed a 10-wicket victory at the Gabba with an unbeaten opening stand of 173, a new record in a successful Test chase. The Australian skipper said he did not expect the Jonny Bairstow head-butt incident with Bancroft to spark any extra ill-feeling between the two sides as the series moves to Adelaide for the second Test that starts on Saturday. But Smith warned there would be no let-up in the hosts’ aggressive approach, revealing that his team had used the issue to help remove Bairstow for 42 in England’s second innings. The Australian skipper told reporters that his team used the head-butt incident to force the England wicketkeeper "off his game. And I think it worked, with the way he got out. "He got caught at third man playing a pretty ordinary stroke," Smith said. "We were just trying to get in his head and it happened to work." The Bairstow-Bancroft incident occurred in a Perth bar in late October, but only came to light at the weekend. Smith said the tactic was all part of playing uncompromising cricket in the traditional Ashes battle. "This has been a really good week for us. I thought we played some really good cricket. We had to fight after the first couple of days and to get the result we were after is very pleasing," the Australian skipper said. Ahead of the first yet day-night Ashes Test starting on Saturday at the Adelaide Oval, Smith warned England’s batsmen to expect another barrage from Australia’s quicks. "The Adelaide wicket might bring some of their bowlers into the game a little bit, but having said that, it’s probably one of the quickest wickets in the country at night," he said. Meanwhile, England captain Joe Root has urged his players to keep backing themselves. England’s inability to capitalise on a strong start in the first innings — they crashed from 246/4 to 302 all out — and a below-par 195 in the second innings cost them any winning chance in Brisbane. "We’ve got to keep believing and trusting the work we’ve been doing, and backing ourselves and backing each other as a group," said Root, on whom much depends with the bat and for team strategy. "For three days, we played some excellent cricket. Unfortunately, when we got into good positions, we didn’t quite capitalise on it." Root defended his elaborate fielding placements at the Gabba for Australia’s master batsman Steve Smith, who turned the Test with a painstaking unbeaten 141 over eight-and-a-half hours to give his side a narrow but crucial innings lead. AFP