Jockey Raymond Danielson — nicknamed "super sub" by the racing media — lived up to his name once again at Turffontein on Sunday when he won the R2m Sansui Summer Cup on 24-1 chance Liege. It was the perfect birthday gift for the Port Elizabeth-born rider — he turned 32 a fortnight ago — and he has taken a leaf out of the book of Gunnar Solskjaer, who came off the substitutes bench many times to score goals for Manchester United during the Alex Ferguson era. With S’manga Khumalo opting for French Navy following Liege’s no show in the Victory Moon Stakes and Lyle Hewitson understandably staying with Social Order after his good run in the Charity Mile, Danielson was a late booking for Liege but he rode a perfect race on the Dynasty gelding. It has been a frustrating season for Sean Tarry and he went into Sunday’s meeting having saddled 30 winners fewer than Justin Snaith and 20 fewer than Mike de Kock. However, this victory brought the smile back to his face. With Abashari, French Navy, Brazuca and Orchid Island failing to make the first four, it was a good race for the bookies and most will have been happy to see Liege notch his sixth win. Although Paul Peter’s team has been on a winning roll for months, few pundits gave his mare, Fort Ember, much chance of troubling the better fancied runners. Still, the daughter of Elusive Fort ran the race of her life under Gunter Wrogemann to secure the runner-up cheque of R400,000. Another outsider, Coral Fever, came home third with Muzi Yeni overcoming the worst draw on Robbie Sage’s runner to earn R200,000. Geoff Woodruff’s Pagoda came fourth. It proved to be a successful meeting for Sage and his chief patron, Colin Bird, as the stable finished second and third in the Investec Dingaans with Seerite and Vacquero. Victory in this race went to Alistair Gordon’s KwaZulu-Natal raider Monks Hood, who won this grade 2 contest under a polished ride from his regular pilot, Anthony Delpech. The son of Querari looked to have something to prove after failing to justify favouritism on the Greyville polytrack a fortnight ago, but he rewarded Gordon’s confidence in sending the gelding to the highveld with a gutsy performance on his sixth career start. This was another good result for the bookies with Tarry’s three-time winner Big Bear and De Kock’s quintet failing to stake a claim at the business end. Delpech was also on the mark in the Racing Association Handicap, with Fortissima taking top honours for trainer Joe Soma. Delpech rode the Fort Wood mare when she finished fourth behind Hermoso Mundo in the Gold Cup at Greyville in July, and so knew his mount had no stamina doubts in Sunday’s 3,200m contest. Paul Peter had to settle for second place in the Summer Cup but his runner, Folk Dance, made no mistake in the grade 3 Fillies Mile, with Gavin Lerena riding a confident race on the daughter of Tiger Ridge. The three-year-old is proving a bargain buy as she cost R100,000 and this victory took her earnings beyond R480,000.