The incoming president of Zimbabwe, Emmerson Mnangagwa, has a monumental task ahead of him and many question whether he is up to it. At the age of 75, he is no longer a young man — even though he is almost 20 years younger than Mugabe. A new word has been coined in Zimbabwe in the past few days, "Mugabeism". It stands for all that destroyed the "jewel of Africa" over the past few decades: systemic corruption, vote-rigging, human rights abuses, rampant nepotism, looting of state resources by those in power — in short, a heartless dictatorship that has reduced 90% of Zimbabweans to unemployment and abject poverty. More than a quarter of the population has left the country over the past 20 years, the vast majority of them as economic migrants. Mnangagwa will have to dismantle Mugabe’s entire patronage system, a complex web of intrigue, deceit, greed and cruelty, with tentacles reaching through every echelon of society and every department of government. Even the private sector has not been spared; necessity has sucked it into the same modus operandi. He has made a good start in his first public address since arriving home from a secret location in SA, where he had fled in fear for his life when Mugabe, egged on by his wife Grace, made it clear that his former deputy, his right-hand man for 40 years, was now his enemy. Mnangagwa declared his intention to establish a "new democracy" and vowed to be the servant of the people. I hope with all my heart that he is able to walk his talk. It is an unenviable task, but he has the goodwill of the international community and enormous resources in the form of the resilience, determination, hard work and skills of Zimbabweans at home and all over the world. Not to mention the natural resources with which Zimbabwe has been blessed: abundant fertile agricultural land, an enormous array of minerals, a good network of roads and a relatively sophisticated infrastructure that, although neglected by lack of maintenance and money, can be fairly quickly restored to working order. The first tough issue on the table is the national budget, which was supposed to be presented to parliament on Thursday. According to economist Eddie Cross, the country will run a huge fiscal deficit this year after the $1.4bn deficit in 2016. The economy is shrinking, and inflation is suddenly accelerating. Finance Minister Ignatius Chombo, a relative and fervent supporter of Mugabe, is believed to be in military custody. A key issue, which Mnangagwa mentioned in his statement on Wednesday, is re-engagement with the international community after Mugabe made our country a pariah state for decades, insulting world leaders and withdrawing Zimbabwe from the Commonwealth. Other issues include: full realignment of all current legislation with the new constitution of 2013; all the steps necessary to hold free and fair elections by August 2018; reformation of the armed forces to bring them under full civilian control; management of the national debt, which Cross estimates now stands at over $30bn if farm compensation is included as a contingent liability; and, of course, the huge issue of what happens to all the commercial farmland that was invaded and dished out to Mugabe’s cronies since 2000. In order to attract foreign direct investment there has to be protection of property rights, so this issue will have to be addressed sooner rather than later. It goes without saying that freedom of the press is crucial to any progress towards democracy. Mugabe increasingly disrespected the rule of law, threatening judges, refusing to obey court orders, and filling the bench with his sympathisers, who were given plasma television sets, farms, luxury vehicles and other "perks". Holding free and fair elections by August 2018 is pretty much impossible given the Mugabeism that permeates the entire electoral process, from the jerrymandering of constituency boundaries to the wholesale falsification of the voters’ roll (which includes thousands of duplicates, thousands of dead people and thousands of people over 100 years of age). The secretariat of the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission was almost totally run by the military. It will take more than a few months to unravel this web and restore any form of credibility to the entire electoral process – which has been characterised by rigged and stolen elections, and mass intimidation and violence for over three decades. The only way I can see around this is for Mnangagwa to establish a truly inclusive transitional authority, with the blessing of parliament, which will then make it possible to defer elections for a few years. This will give him time to clean up Mugabe’s mess and put in place truly democratic institutions. Much has been written that paints Mnangagwa as a monster of the same ilk as Mugabe. The international press in particular has focused on this. His involvement in the Gukurahundi genocide is common knowledge. What may not be such common knowledge is his recent conversion to Christianity. Only the coming days and months will tell whether the man has indeed changed. For now, I am prepared to give him the benefit of the doubt — but the world will be watching, and Zimbabweans have learnt some very bitter lessons from the past 37 years. We will not so easily be trodden upon again. • Mbanga is editor of The Zimbabwean