The JSE may rebound on Thursday, judging by Asian stock markets trading ahead of its opening. Instead of taking its cue from the US where the S&P 500 fell 0.55% on Wednesday, Tokyo’s Nikkei 225 index was up 0.85% at 6.30am South African time, halting a five-trading-day losing streak. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index was up 0.53% and Sydney’s S&P/ASX 200 index was up 0.17%. The JSE’s all share index fell 0.56% to 59,185 points, taking its decline from the 60,590 peak it reached on November 7 to 2.3%. The rand was slightly stronger at R14.39/$, R16.95/€ and R18.96/£. Thursday is a busy day for JSE-listed company results, with Mediclinic International, Investec and Oceana diarised to release their financial statements. It is a also a busy day on the economic data front, with Statistics SA scheduled to release September’s civil cases for debt figures at 9am, wholesale trade figures at 10am, motor trade sales at 11.30am and building statistics at 1pm. Mediclinic warned shareholders on October 17 that its earnings for the six months to end-September were expected to decline about 10% to 11.5 pence from 12.8p in the matching period. The group is in the process of attempting to buy a controlling stake in its 29.9%-owned UK associate Spire Healthcare. "The Middle East business has started the financial year well following the positive operational and regulatory changes in Abu Dhabi," Mediclinic CEO Danie Meintjes said in the trading update. "I am pleased that the investments made in our clinical services, personnel and facilities are driving the turnaround in Abu Dhabi. The Dubai operations continue to perform strongly, benefiting from growing patient numbers at the Mediclinic City Hospital’s new North Wing." Investec has not issued a trading statement, as would be required if its earnings for the six months to end-September differed by more than 20% from the matching period. Investec CEO Stephen Koseff said in a pre-close briefing on September 15 that the group’s "wealth and investment business is expected to report results comfortably ahead of the prior period, while the asset management division is expected to report results in line with the prior period". "Both divisions have benefited from higher levels of average funds under management supported by favourable equity markets and sound net inflows. "The specialist banking business is expected to report results ahead of the prior period. The South African specialist banking business is expected to report results well ahead of the prior period, while the UK specialist banking business is expected to report results well behind the prior period." Fishing group Oceana warned shareholders on September 1 that its basic and headline earnings per share for the year to end-September would fall by up to 50%. Oceana said it suffered from softer global markets for fishmeal and fish oil, and losses on foreign exchange contracts held to cover the import of frozen fish. Other factors included the effect of an 8% average strengthening in the rand on foreign earnings, and lower canned fish sales volumes from slow consumer demand.