The Treasury is working on a new stringent framework for guarantees to state-owned enterprises (SOEs), which will impose strict conditions on them and possibly penalties for noncompliance. The new framework is one of the confidence-creating measures announced by Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba. The size of the government’s ballooning guarantee book, which now totals about R470bn, is one of the concerns of credit ratings agencies because of the risk it poses to the fiscus. Their concern has been heightened by the sharp deterioration in the finances of some of the SOEs, particularly of the cash-strapped Eskom, which has state guarantees amounting to R350bn. Treasury deputy director-general for asset and liability management Anthony Julies told members of Parliament’s finance committee on Wednesday, during its meeting with South African Airways (SAA) board members and executives, that the framework — which has to be finalised by March 2018 — would be presented to Cabinet for approval. Julies said the government had overextended itself in guarantees and wanted to bring this exposure down. The new framework would introduce a limit on the size of guarantees to SOEs; would prohibit the issuance of guarantees for operational expenditure; would not allow the issue of guarantees for social projects; would require that guarantees be targeted towards capital projects; and would ensure that the rollover of guaranteed debt on maturity was not automatic but would require a new application. "Most importantly, there will be clear, measurable and practical conditions and performance targets that will be attached to guarantees," Julies told the finance committee. Consideration would be given to imposing a guarantee fee as a penalty in the event of noncompliance with these conditions. The size of the penalty would be linked to the extent of the noncompliance. Rand Merchant Bank credit analyst Elena Ilkova said the introduction of a new framework for guarantees had been under discussion for a number of years. "So having a firm deadline is a positive development. The highlighted key features of the framework are also encouraging — a standardised approach with clear criteria will help with future decisions. Predictability and stability are important components of investment decisions and clarity on the guarantee framework would reduce uncertainty around both the government’s willingness and its ability to support state-owned enterprises." Ilkova cautioned, however, that while progress had been made on the new framework, investors would still need reassurance that the guarantees currently in place remained stable. Julies said the aim of the new framework would be to discourage SOEs from making applications for guarantees, because this happened too frequently. "We want to reduce the size of the portfolio and reduce the frequency of applications," he said. Julies said that the Treasury was considering introducing a limit on the total amount of guarantees extended by the government for the first time. This could be a percentage of GDP, revenue or expenditure. The limit would be risk-weighted and would be for each entity individually as well as a global amount for all of them. Currently the Treasury only has a "soft" limit for debt and guarantees combined. Julies said the Treasury would not want to continue with the "musical chairs" practice of replacing debt of SOEs with government debt — as had been the case with the R10bn recapitalisation for SAA. "We would not want to do that going forward," he said. "We have to find ways and means of reducing both the guarantees as well as reducing the debt and ultimately getting the economy to grow at much higher levels than it is currently," Julies said. ensorl@businesslive.co.za