The Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma camp in the ANC succession race outwardly appears confident, but behind the scenes it is feared that Mpumalanga leader David Mabuza may not give them his support, which is key to victory at the December conference. Business Day understands that Mabuza was pushing for the Dlamini-Zuma camp to accommodate Gauteng chairman Paul Mashatile, who features on her opponent Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa’s slate as treasurer. The ANC succession race is neck and neck between Ramaphosa and Dlamini-Zuma, but there appears to be moves towards a more "unitary" or consensus-driven approach to avoid a divisive leadership battle. Mpumalanga has emerged as a kingmaker in the race, as head of the second-largest delegation to the conference kicking off on December 16. It is understood that in order to ensure Mabuza’s support, Dlamini-Zuma’s campaigners are willing to accommodate Mashatile, who has long been an opponent of the faction aligned to President Jacob Zuma and now former AU Commission chairwoman Dlamini-Zuma. Mabuza and Mashatile have been holding talks about a potential "unity ticket" in order to do away with slates and ensure the ANC does not split in the wake of the 2019 election. Business Day understands senior members of the Dlamini-Zuma camp, David Mahlobo and Kebby Maphatsoe, met Mashatile in a bid to woo him over to her slate. Mahlobo and Maphatsoe declined to comment on the talks, which are believed to be continuing. Mashatile had referred them to other Gauteng leaders who have also met with the pair. "What they offered Paul are positions that do not exist. These are the positions that will require delegates at conference to amend the party’s constitution. Another thing is Paul will not be part of a slate or winner-takes-it-all [approach]," said a senior Gauteng leader who is privy to the talks. The constitutional amendments could extend the top six leadership structure to a top nine, including two deputy presidents and two additional deputy secretaries-general. The amendments would have to be agreed on by two-thirds of the delegates attending the conference and would have to be decided before the election of the leaders. Gauteng province supported a decision by the national executive committee to allow elections for each position separately to ensure that the losing candidate could still stand as a deputy, a proposal first put forward at the ANC’s national general council in 2015. A source in the Dlamini-Zuma caucus said this could threaten Mabuza’s chances of becoming deputy president — he is on her slate in that slot. Should Dlamini-Zuma lose and decide to contest the deputy president position, Mabuza could find himself out in the cold. ANC Mpumalanga secretary Mandla Ndlovu said on Monday his province would pronounce on the matter on Friday during the provincial general council. However, he did not deny that Mabuza was pushing for Mashatile to be accommodated. It is understood that Mabuza and Mashatile met on Monday. ANC Gauteng spokesman Nkenke Kekana, when asked for comment on Mashatile, said the province did not belong to any faction and did not believe in slates. "Gauteng will prefer a leadership that will be united and be able to unite the organisation. Unity is not the absence of contestation," he said.