The bond market has been on tenterhooks this week, not because of the monetary policy committee meeting, the October inflation report or developments to the north, but rather the threat of a dual downgrade by rating agencies S&P Global Ratings and Moody’s Investors Service. The adverse turn in SA’s rating in 2012 coincided with the country’s inclusion in the Citigroup World Government Bond Index (WGBI). After five years, we are finally at the precipice of being excluded from the WGBI, as well as the Barclays Global Aggregate Index (BGAI). Rather than taking a strong view on whether the required downgrades will happen this week, the focus has been on the capital flow implications. To be sure, the fundamental pressure on the rating is acute. Yet there is an incentive for the rating agencies to stay put until after the ANC’s national conference in December and the February 2018 budget statement before making a high-impact call. The index criteria have endogenised the sovereign credit rating via the potential capital flow reversal. While this endogeneity is not a reason to delay a downgrade, it would surely require high conviction when the agencies do make their move. But back to the numbers. The oft-quoted effect of index exclusion is an alarming $10bn (R140bn at the current exchange rate). This is equal to the country’s current account deficit, about 75% of the government’s annual interest bill, or 86% of a year’s worth of weekly government bond auctions. That is a lot. Could this be a gross overestimation of what is at stake? We think so. A simple calculation of assumed assets under management multiplied by SA’s weight in the WGBI and BGAI puts the total potential outflow at $12bn (R170bn). Yet not all benchmarked funds passively track these indices. The dynamics in foreign flows to emerging bond markets suggests that before the 2013 taper tantrum, benchmark-sensitive investors drove the surge in foreign holdings. Since then, the source of the funds has shifted towards unconstrained investors, the so-called "tourist dollar". These flows have been less benchmark-sensitive and not necessarily linked to the WGBI or BGAI. A counterargument to lower index dependence comes from the rise of exchange-traded funds (ETFs). While ETFs have played a growing role in asset allocation towards emerging markets, most of the ETFs registered in the UK, Europe and US are linked to rating-insensitive indices, such as in the JPMorgan index suite. Hence, the size of the cliff effect and immediate forced selling is probably overstated. IMF analysis shows a broad-based rise in foreign holdings of emerging market local currency bonds across countries during 2012. Therefore, WGBI inclusion was not the sole driver of inflows into SA at that time. Even if we attribute all the net bond inflows to the WGBI effect, it still points to an effectual smaller outflow of R100bn ($7bn). Excess benchmark-driven flows into the South African bond market in 2012, compared with the general emerging market experience, could be a proxy for the pure WGBI share. This equated to R40bn ($3bn at the current exchange rate). With greater flexibility in western funds, the WGBI-related holdings may reflect Japanese-based funds or sovereign wealth funds. The mandates of these funds tend to be conservative, with strict benchmark and mandate criteria. At this stage, it is not all doom and gloom. The global economic backdrop is a mitigating factor, thanks to the broad-based economic upswing, still low developed market bond yields, risk appetite and the search for yield and the long-term asset allocation shift towards emerging markets. Although the forced selling will be substantially less than the soundbites suggest, it does not mean we should ignore the effects of rating downgrades. Junk status and portfolio outflows will raise the cost of capital and lower growth. With our precarious fiscal position, weaker growth would put more pressure on tax revenues, requiring even greater borrowing to plug the mounting shortfall. The effect of even minor disinvestment of $3bn would be exacerbated by the sharp increase in government issuance. The Treasury is already borrowing 25% more on a weekly basis compared with a month ago. The estimates of bond outflows are seemingly exaggerated. The benign global backdrop and prevalence of unconstrained nonresident investors will, for now, mean there is indeed life after WGBI. That is, until the focus shifts from SA’s ratings and political risks to the global cost of capital and the potential reversal in the "tourist dollar". • Nel is fixed income strategist at Matrix Fund Managers.