It was too soon to make pronouncements on the way forward in Zimbabwe including a call for early elections, President Jacob Zuma said on Thursday. Responding to questions in the National Council of Provinces, Zuma said it remained unclear what the situation was in Zimbabwe, but clarity would arise in the next day or two. Zuma was to jet off to Botswana late on Thursday for an emergency Southern Africa Development Community (Sadc) troika meeting to discuss the crisis in Zimbabwe. "There are developments in Zimbabwe … anyone who makes a conclusion as to what will happen does not calculate … do not want to speculate. It will be too early to take any firm decision now. There could be a firm proposal of what should be done shortly … for now we cannot say we must make a particular call, except to say let us solve the problems peacefully in [that] country," said Zuma. On Wednesday, Zuma dispatched special envoys to Zimbabwe — Defence Minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula and State Security Minister Bongani Bongo — for talks with President Robert Mugabe and the Zimbabwe Defence Forces. Zuma sent Mapisa-Nqakula and Bongo in his capacity as current Sadc chairman. Zimbabwe’s military took control of the country on Wednesday, in a move widely seen as a coup d’état, but it has denied overthrowing the government. This followed a battle to succeed Mugabe, which triggered the sacking of Emmerson Mnangagwa as vice-president. Mnangagwa enjoys the armed forces’s support. Speculation is that Mnangagwa, a one-time ally of Mugabe, will take over as president of an interim unity government that will seek to stabilise the country’s economy, at least until 2018’s scheduled elections. Mugabe remained under house arrest on Thursday as he, armed forces generals and various stakeholders held talks behind closed doors. Zuma said various trade and other agreements between SA and Zimbabwe would remain in place regardless of the outcome of the Zimbabwe negotiations. "Whatever happens in the country, what the country has committed itself to cannot be changed. Our agreements will not be affected … those speaking are saying they are correcting things. They are not saying this government must go," he said. SA remains a key trading partner of Zimbabwe. Parliament’s presiding officers said on behalf of the national legislature that they welcomed the swiftly undertaken efforts by the government and Sadc regarding the unfolding situation in Zimbabwe. "Our links with Zimbabwe go back to before 1994, during the many years of the struggle for freedom in Southern Africa when we fought side-by-side against colonial and racial oppression. Since our first non-racial, democratic elections in 1994, which ushered in a new era of constitutional democracy for our country, we have worked closely at fostering development and co-operation between our parliament and other parliaments in the Sadc Parliamentary Forum. "We trust that current issues facing the people of Zimbabwe are resolved in a manner which does not undermine but rather supports ongoing regional co-operation and economic development initiatives," the presiding officers said. phakathib@businesslive.co.za