Are you in the business of clothing, footwear, textiles and fashion accessories? Get ready to network and explore at the China Premium Tex – Apparel, Textile & Footwear (ATF) Trade Exhibition, taking place at the Cape Town International Convention Centre from November 21 to 23. At the exhibition, buyers from chain stores, independent retailers, boutiques, importers, distributors, factory managers and other decision makers can meet 140 international manufacturers and suppliers from China, South Africa, Indonesia, India, Hong Kong, Bangladesh, Belarus and Estonia. More than 100 manufacturers from China will display a range of products exclusively to Southern African buyers. These will include fashion garments and footwear, sportswear and sports footwear, safety boots, denim, home textiles, fashion fabrics, yarn, interlinings, trims and fasteners, fashion accessories such as bags and scarves, and much more. Don’t miss this opportunity to snap up new lines, agencies, products and services! The China Premium Tex opening ceremony will take place at 10am in Hall 4A on Tuesday, November 21, and anyone in the industry is welcome to attend. To book your seat at any of the insightful business presentations or the trend talk, email atfexpo@worldonline.co.za. There is no cost to attend, but space is limited and seats are allocated on a first come, first served basis. Open to trade only. Trend talk by Nicola Cooper of Nicola Cooper & Associates Topic: Sociopolitical, technological and environmental trends shaping the mindset of the current and future African consumer Cooper, a senior fashion, lifestyle and pop culture trend analyst, will focus on explaining trends from global-to-local, local-to-local and local-to-global perspectives. In this explorative, illuminating and insightful talk, learn about pioneering African trends and the effect these will have on lifestyle, fashion, advertising, retail and emerging consumer markets in 2017­–18. Presentation by Dave Nemeth, owner of Trend Forward Topic: The future of business and retail The only certainty in business today is the death of business as we know it. This presentation, based on a year’s research, will look at the disruptions that businesses and specifically retailers are facing. It will cover areas such as macro trends affecting business and retail; current consumer attitudes, technology and the retail space; the future of retail; the changing face of corporate culture; and evolving company structures. Presentation by Brett Kaplan, independent retail consultant, Choppies Superstores Topic: The changing apparel retail landscape in SA Kaplan was the MD of clothing and general merchandise at Woolworths for 37 years. He was instrumental in building that business into the success that it is today. He will talk about the globalisation of retail, where both hemispheres are taking advantage of the “untapped African opportunity” with South Africa at the centre of this development. Retailers learn that a “cut and paste” approach does not always deliver results in South Africa, as consumers’ fashion appreciation is unlike that of other regions, including Australia, albeit a southern-hemisphere lifestyle. Kaplan will look at the challenges of and opportunities in apparel retail in South Africa. Pre-register for FREE entry online today to visit the event and/or presentations, and receive a complimentary copy of the 2018 African Clothing & Textile Trade Sourcing Directory valued at R100 and a show catalogue on arrival at the show. For more information, visit www.atfexpo.co.za, call Tel: +27 21 790 5849 or email atfexpo@worldonline.co.za. Please note, this is a business exhibition and not open to the general public. Persons under the age of 18 will not be admitted. This article was paid for by China Premium Tex.