Singapore — Oil prices climbed on Wednesday after a reported fall in US crude inventories and on expectations that an Opec-led production cut aimed at tightening the market will be extended beyond next March. Brent crude futures, the international benchmark for oil prices, were at $63.07 a barrel at 2.57am GMT, up 50c or 0.8% from their last close. US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures were at $57.74 a barrel, up 92c or 1.6%. Traders said markets had been supported by an effort led by the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec) to restrain output in a bid to end a global supply overhang. The deal to curb production is due to expire in March, but Opec will meet on November 30 in Vienna to discuss the outlook for the policy. "The meeting’s outcome will ultimately determine oil prices’ near-term fate," said Stephen Innes, head of trading for Asia-Pacific at futures brokerage Oanda. JP Morgan said in its 2018 commodities outlook, released late on Tuesday, that "oil markets in 2018 will be balanced on the back of extended … production cuts", but without extended cuts, markets would be in surplus. "We expect Brent to trade at the top of the $40-$60 a barrel range, with Brent averaging $58 a barrel in 2018," the US bank said. "WTI is expected to average $54.6 a barrel." Traders said there was also some price support from a weekly report on Tuesday by the American Petroleum Institute, which said US crude inventories fell by 6.4-million barrels in the week to November 17. Despite this, traders said crude markets were being weighed down by rising production in the US, which has jumped by almost 15% since mid-2016 to 9.65-million barrels a day. "While an extension of the Opec deal to limit production may inspire oil bulls short-term, the rising US output is likely to present headwinds, ultimately limiting upside gains," said Lukman Otunuga, analyst at futures brokerage FXTM. The latest official US production and inventory data is due on Wednesday. Reuters