The ANC and government have been accused of marginalising civil society. This was part of discussions at the national consultative conference organised by ANC veterans and stalwarts, who are worried about the state of the party and the country. Opening the conference at Constitutional Hill in Johannesburg on Friday, Nelson Mandela Foundation board chairman Njabulo Ndebele said President Jacob Zuma had left the country and its citizens vulnerable and exposed through state capture. The ANC has dismissed the conference even after the veterans tried to lobby it to participate. However, a number of ANC members and alliance partners are attending the three-day conference, which ends on Sunday. These included presidential hopeful and national executive committee member Lindiwe Sisulu, Derek Hanekom, SACP leaders Blade Nzimande, Solly Mapaila and Thulas Nxesi. Ousted finance minister Pravin Gordhan, his ousted deputy Mcebisi Jonas, and former finance minister Trevor Manuel were also in attendance. Professor William Gumede, who was facilitating a panel discussion on the role of civil society, said the reason many liberation movements failed once they went into government was because that they broke away from these organisations. “Next month is our last chance. The ANC may be history after December unless there is serious intervention,” he said referring to the party’s elective conference. However, he said the crisis was not only in the ANC — the country was in crisis too. The challenge was to bring about a renewal across society. Gumede spoke about the scourge of corruption, especially in the state. He said democratic institutions were being used to loot the state and the rule of law was being used for corruption. Former government spokesman Themba Maseko, on behalf of Business Leadership SA, said those in government allowed civil society to be marginalised. “We never thought those leaders in government would be captured,” he said. “Our eyes are now open.” Maseko said civil society needed to be credited for standing up against corruption. Neeshan Balton, executive director of the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation, said the struggle now was to expose the rot. He said comments by some ANC members accusing civil society of being agents of regime change showed how the party now viewed them. Fatima Shabodien from ActionAid SA said these comments about civil society actually resulted in regime change and pushed these organisations into opposition. She said civil society was the watchdog trying to hold government accountable. The Nelson Mandela Foundation’s Ndebele said: “It is hard to deploy constitutional order and rule of law when these are not recognised and respected by the head of state and structure of governance created to undermine the state.” Without naming the Guptas, Ndebele accused Zuma of handing power over to the controversial family. “They want to feel and demonstrate the power they have bought in the same way they landed their wedding guests as head of state. “At that particular moment in the next room the head of state is powerless,” he said. Ndebele said it looked like “the complete capture of the body, mind and spirit”. Zuma, his son Duduzane and the Guptas have been embroiled in allegations of state capture. Zuma, however, has denied this and in an interview this week said allegations of state capture were “political propaganda”.