With just one cabinet meeting remaining in 2017, Transport Minister Joe Maswanganyi has one final opportunity to address his colleagues on the challenges affecting the Passenger Rail Agency of SA (Prasa) and the South African National Road Agency (Sanral). Despite Maswanganyi assuring Parliament’s portfolio committee on transport that he would raise the matter of the troubled entities with the Cabinet, Communications Minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane said the Cabinet did not discuss this. She said during a post-cabinet briefing on Thursday, Maswanganyi would have had to conclude the matter at committee level before discussing the matter before the Cabinet. Sanral was late in tabling its 2016-17 annual report last week and has been seized with re-evaluating its funding models for road development and maintenance, saying the final call rests with the minister. The agency has scrambled to "clarify" reports that it intends to write off e-toll debt older than three years. It sent an e-mail, which Business Day has seen, to registered Gauteng e-toll users, that said while the agency had made provisions to accommodate debt impairment as an option, there was no plan to write off debt and nonpayment remained an offence. "Although we have made a provision as required for accounting purposes to impair the R3.6bn debt, it should be emphasised that this amount was not written off, as this impaired debt will still be pursued," the e-mail said. This week, Maswanganyi defended Prasa’s interim board before the committee and signalled he would be closing in on the Werksmans Attorneys probe into corruption there. Prasa is the worst performing state-owned business for the 2015-16 financial year and the agency was unable to table its 2016-17 annual report to Parliament ahead of the late September deadline. Prasa spokeswoman Nana Zenani said the timing of the tabling coincided with the end of the previous board’s term and Prasa was on track to submit the report by the end of November. Transport spokesman Ishmael Mnisi did not respond to questions on Prasa, Sanral or the minister’s intention to brief Cabinet. magubanek@businesslive.co.za