The rand remained under R13.70/$ on Wednesday morning after strengthening to R13.57/$ on Tuesday. The rand managed to hold onto most of Tuesday’s gains despite the dollar strengthening after incoming US Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell said at his confirmation hearing that he would back an interest rate rise in December. Speculation that Cyril Ramaphosa will win the race for president of the ANC at the party’s conference at Nasrec on December 16-20, positioning him to become president of SA, has helped the rand confound expectations it would weaken after S&P Global Ratings downgraded the country’s sovereign credit rating on Friday night. The rand has rebounded 4% from the R14.16/$ it sank to at the weekend. The currency was trading at R13.69/$, R16.22/€ and R18.28/£ at 7am on Wednesday. North Korea’s test of a missile it claimed could reach anywhere in the US made Asian markets jittery on Wednesday morning. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index was down 0.4% and mainland China’s Shanghai composite index was down 0.5%. Sydney’s S&P/ASX 200 index, however, was up 0.5% and Tokyo’s Topix index rose 0.6%. Fruit and sugar producer Crookes Brothers said in a trading statement on Tuesday it expected to report on Wednesday that headline earnings per share (HEPS) for the six months to end-September declined by as much as 84%. "The earnings decline is attributable mainly to a decrease in sugar prices and a reduction in sugar cane under crop in the aftermath of the drought, resulting in a volume decrease as well as a significant biological asset write down on our sugar cane crop," Crookes Brothers said. "The board of directors of the company cautions against using interim results to project figures for full-year earnings given the seasonality and timing of crop production at half-year, and the impact of these factors on biological asset valuations, particularly for the deciduous and macadamia crops, which are only fair valued at year end." Recently listed Kaap Agri is also scheduled to release its results for the year to end-September on Wednesday. "At half-year, the company indicated that it anticipated improved earnings growth in the second half of the financial year. This has materialised due to improved operational performance as well as the annualisation of certain costs. "Recurring headline earnings for the full year are expected to be between R244m and R248.2m, representing an increase of between 16% and 18% from the previous comparable period, with strong performances from all business segments," Kaap Agri said on November 8.