The country is experiencing its worst economic crisis since the defeat of apartheid. Unemployment is rising, the proportion of South Africans living in poverty has rebounded to the extent that 30.4-million people — 55% of the population — are living below the poverty line. Investment levels are falling, economic confidence has collapsed and the country’s fiscal position has deteriorated. Urgent action must be undertaken to turn the economy around. To stimulate growth, create more jobs and improve people’s lives, SA needs committed and capable leadership in the government, business, labour and civil society. These social partners should collaborate to improve governance and agree on an ambitious plan for economic recovery. Blockages to business activity must be removed. Regulatory uncertainty must be reduced, red tape cut and broadband costs lowered. Standoffs such as the dispute between the mining industry and the mining minister should be resolved as a matter of priority. Such discord stifles growth and leads to job losses. In addition to increased collaboration among the country’s social partners, firm interventions are needed to remove the cancer of corruption, which has taken hold of some of its public and private entities, including state-owned companies. While a judicial commission of inquiry must be established to investigate the extent of state capture, the investigation and prosecution of those involved should begin without delay. The private and public sectors should agree on clear reforms that will ensure open and transparent procurement and tendering processes. Regarding macroeconomic policy, it is crucially important that SA maintain control over its own destiny and jealously guard the country’s policy sovereignty. It must not fall into an unsustainable debt trap, in which ever-rising debt payments cripple the country’s fiscus, leading to a situation in which external creditors can begin to impose conditions and limit its policy options. Fiscal and monetary policies must be well managed to ensure that over a number of generations, SA can continue to make sufficient resources available to fund its project of building a new, more equal society. After the election of a new ANC leadership in December, the country must seek to unite all South Africans — the government, business, labour and communities — around a new deal for jobs, growth and transformation. A new policy does not necessarily needs to be invented; the National Development Plan [NDP] provides a clear framework. The economic policies of the ANC are sound. South Africans have shown over the years that concerted, combined action by the country’s key social partners is capable of achieving great goals. South Africans have agreed on peace accords during times of conflict, they were able to find agreement to achieve their 1994 political settlement, its postapartheid labour law regime has brought new protection to millions of oppressed and exploited workers, and more recently, the country’s nascent minimum wage dispensation has the potential to improve the lives of millions of working-class families. To place SA on a new path of economic growth and development, the country has to come together again and agree on stimulus measures and structural interventions that will radically transform opportunities, especially for black South Africans, young people and women, and improve the economy’s growth potential. SA has to be bold and determined. It should target 3% GDP growth in 2018, rapidly rising to 5% growth by 2023. Instead of billions of rand leaving the country, through a new deal, SA should position itself as an attractive place for investment, where both South African and foreign investors are confident that they will achieve positive returns. It is through such investments that SA will create new businesses and stimulate job growth. An immediate priority is to restore confidence among investors. SA should greatly increase levels of investment from the current level of less than 20% of GDP to the NDP target of 30% of GDP. To do this, SA should square the circle. It should show investors that inclusive growth and transformation are good for business, just as the country should show the mass of its people that strong South African businesses are necessary if the country is to have a sustained period of inclusive growth and transformation. Better governed, the South African economy has a number of significant comparative advantages. It has a young, talented population that yearns to be mobilised into formal economic activity. It has world-class mineral resources that remain in the ground, valued by Citibank a few years ago at more than $2.5-trillion. SA has 88% of the world’s platinum-group metals, 80% of its manganese, 72% of its chrome, 32% of its vanadium and 30% of its gold. Due to bountiful natural resources and proven expertise in this area, the country also has some of the best potential globally for developing its renewable energy sources, including solar and wind energy. The International Energy Agency recently named SA as one of a handful of countries that could green its industry cost-effectively. As the world invests in renewables to decarbonise its power systems, SA could again become the investment destination of choice for activities that are electricity intensive. South African industry should be nurtured through dedicated industrial policy interventions. Recent interactions with leaders in the manufacturing sector have indicated that with the right mix of interventions, more than 1-million jobs could be created by strengthening and growing this vital sector, which has the highest job multiplier of all sectors in the economy. It is a moral and economic imperative that the racialised character of South African business should continue to be transformed. Black industrialists, black-owned small businesses, township business and co-operatives must be given the opportunity to succeed. Much more should be done to ensure that successful black businesses are built, especially small and medium-sized business, that if successful will grow into big businesses in future. Another imperative is that land redistribution be accelerated, in combination with systems to improve land productivity and support new farming activity. Greater investment is required in irrigation, and support should be given to small-scale farmers to assist them in gaining profitable access to markets for their products. To positively harness the effects of urbanisation, urban land must also be better managed for housing, commerce and community development. A clean-up and refocusing of compromised state-owned companies, such as Eskom and South African Airways, must be undertaken. Nonexecutive directors who are ethical and competent should be appointed to boards and professional managers must be employed to restore corporate credibility. SA should work to promote increased levels of African regional integration. The aim must be to promote more intra-African trade and support industrialisation through the creation of large regional markets. A key objective must be to increase exports of manufactured goods, foodstuffs and services, including financial services, into the region. This cannot be a one-way street — SA must also seek to import more goods produced from within its region and facilitate low-cost trade routes for its land-locked neighbours. "Trickle-down" economics will not work for SA. Rather, it is by undertaking well-conceived interventions that change the unfair structure of its society that it will stimulate a new wave of dynamism and growth in the economy. SA has a mixed economy, in which each social partner must be recognised and acknowledged for bringing relative strengths to the table. Business brings know-how, capital, technological innovation and entrepreneurial skills. Labour brings broad-based legitimacy, shop-floor experience and working-class power. Community representatives bring the voice of consumers, producers, small business operators and the unemployed, young and old. The government brings overall vision and leadership and occupies a position in which it represents the country’s national strategic interests. If SA’s social partners can come together, show leadership and agree on a new deal for jobs, growth and transformation, hope and confidence in the country’s future can indeed be rapidly restored. • Ramaphosa is deputy president of the ANC and South Africa.