The Titans, the defending Ram Slam T20 Challenge champions, will seal a home semifinal if they win two of their three matches over the next six days. Their mission starts with the derby against the Lions at the Wanderers on Wednesday. They host the Warriors in Benoni on Friday and end the week against the Knights in Port Elizabeth on Sunday. Titans star batsman AB de Villiers said that the Titans and Lions had played some memorable matches in the Bullring and he was looking forward to the short trip across the Jukskei River. "The derby is always special‚" he said. "There’s a great history between the two teams and we’ve had some great games before," De Villiers said. "Every game is big‚ but to go to Johannesburg and play in the Bullring is special." Although the Titans have impressed this season with four wins while one match had to be abandoned due to rain, Lions coach Geoffrey Toyana said they could be beaten. "I really believe we’ve got the personnel in our squad to challenge them," Toyana said. "If you look at our bowling attack‚ I strongly believe it’s one of the best attacks in the competition. So we need to combine that with our batting to try and get that perfect performance. "We’re at the Wanderers where we really play good cricket‚ so the Titans can be beaten," Toyana said. In the other match on Wednesday‚ the Cape Cobras, who are second from the bottom, host bottom-of-the-log Warriors at Boland Park, with both teams looking to move away from the danger zone. The Cobras go into this match following two consecutive wins after a hat-trick of losses in their opening three matches and captain JP Duminy hopes their campaign can now get going. "It definitely was [a launchpad for us]‚" he said about the two recent wins. "It’s a big morale boost for us as a team after we had a tough two weeks in the first three games," Duminy said. "So it’s always good to build a little bit of momentum." The Warriors are also on a high after they beat the Lions last weekend by comfortably chasing 183. Captain Jon-Jon Smuts is hoping for more of the same. "We had a good win and we’re getting closer to playing really good cricket again. "With the batting we need a few more good starts and a few more of the batters to put their hands up. "We had Colin [Ingram] put his hand up in the last one and Christiaan [Jonker] played a very valuable knock as well. "The bowlers have been fighting well and hopefully can continue that in the next few games." TimesLIVE