Proposals in the Draft Education Laws Amendment Bill to clip the wings of school governing bodies in appointing senior staff are aimed at protecting schools from "jobs for cash" practices exposed in 2014, the Department of Basic Education says. The public comment period for the bill closes on Friday. One of its most controversial provisions is a proposal to revoke the power of school governing bodies to appoint principals, deputy principals and heads of department, and give it to provincial education departments instead. While critics say the proposed change will make the appointment process opaque and undermines parents’ rights to have a say in the education of their children, the department maintains it is in the best interest of schools. "There is an urgent need to strengthen our recruitment process, and this includes … the findings and recommendations of the ministerial task team on [the] ‘Jobs for Sale’ [scandal]," said Troy Martens, spokeswoman of Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga. In 2014, the media exposed how the South African Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu), circuit and district officials, and school governing body members were colluding to ensure that Sadtu-affiliated teachers were placed in senior positions for which they did not qualify. A ministerial task team investigation came to the same conclusion, and found the problem was worst in KwaZulu-Natal. An explanatory memorandum to the bill makes an oblique reference to this problem. "Many public schools, especially in deep rural areas, do not have functioning governing bodies and persons with the necessary skills to conduct interview processes. In many instances, the interview committees do not … know what is required of a principal, a deputy principal or a head of department," it reads. University of the Witwatersrand professor of Education Policy Brahm Fleisch said the bill’s provisions also aimed to give provincial education departments the capacity to tackle the lack of transformation in some middle-class schools. "Their school governing bodies are essentially appointing principals, deputy principals and heads of department of the same race, and not allowing a new generation of teachers to be promoted," he said. The Federation of School Governing Bodies of SA (Fedsas) said that the bill gave too much power to the government. "It takes us back to a model where the state controls everything. It goes against every principle of public education and democracy," Fedsas deputy CEO Jaco Deacon said. kahnt@businesslive.co.za