Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa sees no reason why President Jacob Zuma would reasonably refuse to be subjected to the inquiry into state capture if he is formally called. Ramaphosa also said he would abide by the outcomes of the ANC’s elective conference, whatever they were. The deputy president was speaking to reporters from Parliament’s press gallery association in Cape Town on Thursday morning. As the extent of state capture continues to unravel before the public, more than one committee has indicated an intention to call Zuma to answer questions on the matter. Ramaphosa said that on various fronts state capture at various state-owned enterprises was being investigated and all people called to make representations should come forward. "I have gone public to say we want law enforcement agencies to investigate and conclude these matters. The NPA [National Prosecuting Authority] must work on these and one expects and hopes that such a process is under way." "I frankly can’t believe you can have wrongdoing on such a grand scale and not have any accountability," said Ramaphosa. He said that while government processes could take a long time, it was important for as many as people as possible to account to those leading investigations — as leaders of the past did. "The committee will have to decide whether the president should come before the committee and testify. Once they have decided so, a view needs to be taken on. "Nelson Mandela went to court as president and demonstrated that even if you are head of state, you should never be above the law," he said. He even went as far as using himself as an example, saying he willing went to the Farlam commission investigating the shooting of mineworkers at Lonmin’s Marikana platinum mining operations in 2012. "If the court subpoenas you, you should be willing to go. I went to the Farlam commission and I was not absolved from going there to be held accountable. You should be willing to demonstrate that you are indeed willing to subject yourself to the norms and rules of society and go there. Ramaphosa said he did not expect the outcomes of the ANC conference in December to be disputed in court and he had no intentions of disputing the outcome should he lose. His remarks came as the status of various regional and provincial structures in the ruling party are being contested. Along with ANC MP Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, Ramaphosa is a frontrunner in the race to succeed President Jacob Zuma as leader of the ruling party. On Wednesday the High Court in Bloemfontein ordered that the conference should not be held until 29 branch general meetings, which the court declared to have been unlawful and irregular, are conducted in a lawful manner. When asked about the risk of a collapse of the conference or the potential contestation of its results, Ramaphosa said he did not expect to sit in the dock over the conference results in January. "After the conference I intend to go on a bit of a holiday from this gruelling year. Whatever the outcome, I am intending to do just that. If people say there will be disputes, I don’t expect them to occur. One of the best things the president did is invite people to the last supper," said Ramaphosa. The deputy president recalled being invited by Zuma to a dinner with other potential candidates, Dlamini-Zuma, National Assembly speaker Baleka Mbete, ANC treasurer-general Zweli Mkhize, Human Settlements Minister Lindiwe Sisulu, former ANC treasurer-general Mathews Phosa and Minister in the Presidency Jeff Radebe. "It was a warm occasion and no one had a dagger in their pocket. We all agreed on an orderly conference and he (Zuma) asked us to appeal to our supporters to be orderly and hold a successful conference. We all agreed to accept the decisions of the branches … as represented by delegates of the conference," he said.