Strong growth in Investec’s Southern African specialist banking division offset declines in its UK specialist banking and South African asset management divisions. Investec’s interest income grew 18% to £1.23bn and its fee and commission income grew 12.4% to £754m in the six months to end-September from the matching period in 2016, it reported on Thursday. After-tax profit grew nearly 20% to £238m. Investec raised its interim dividend by 5% to 10.5 pence. The group segments itself into three divisions — asset management, wealth and investment, and specialist banking — split between two geographic regions — Southern Africa, and UK and other. "Our geographical and operational diversity supports a strong recurring income base and earnings which will help us weather an uncertain world," Investec CEO Stephen Koseff said in the results statement. Investec’s largest division, Southern Africa specialist banking, reported a 44% surge in operating profit to £165m, helping the group’s total grow 10% to £372m. Measured in rand, this division’s operating profit growth was halved to 21.6%, the results statement said. In contrast to SA, Investec’s UK specialist banking division suffered a 22% decline in operating profit to £74m. Investec said this was partly due to "particularly strong investment banking and client flow trading activity levels in the prior period". It was also due to the group investing in technology. "We have improved and enhanced our digital and online services to complement our strong client centric service model. This spending has further strengthened our franchises in private banking and wealth management," Koseff said. Investec’s UK asset management division grew operating profit 16% to £50m while its Souther African asset management division suffered a 15% decline to £33m. "The business benefited from higher average funds under management supported by positive market movements and solid net inflows of £2.1bn. Earnings were negatively impacted by lower performance fees in SA, Investec said. Its UK wealth and investment division grew operating profit 21% to £35m while its Southern African sister division’s remained flat at £14m. "The UK business had a strong performance while earnings in SA have been impacted by lower brokerage volumes," the results statement said. "Investec achieved a satisfactory operating performance in all its businesses despite macroeconomic and political uncertainty in both SA and the UK," Investec MD Bernard Kantor said in the results statement.