SA is recognised as having one of the world’s most sophisticated financial regulatory systems, yet despite comparatively high rates of participation in the financial services sector, there are still structural and systemic issues that limit real, effective financial inclusion. Unfortunately for many South Africans, over-regulation has made it unnecessarily difficult for small businesses and the economically marginalised to access basic financial services. In his medium-term budget policy statement, Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba drew attention to these difficulties when he said SA needed a transformative financial sector — a sector that is not only transformed, but is also transformative to the economy. This focus on holistic transformation in the financial sector is central to the current narrative around the need for an inclusive growth strategy. According to research presented at Finmark Trust’s Sadc Financial Inclusion Forum earlier this year, there is a growing body of evidence to show that financial sector deepening is crucial to the process of economic development, and that finance can positively impact the poor by reducing income inequality and expanding employment. Moreover, research shows that financial inclusion is a reliable predictor of socioeconomic development and an important tool for eradicating poverty. On an individual level, access to the full range of financial services such as savings, credit, and insurance, helps people to save and preserve wealth, receive and transfer value, and manage risk when faced with unanticipated financial shocks. For small businesses and entrepreneurs, access to financial services allows them to invest in adequate stock, rent premises, embark on capital expansion, and manage liquidity. The fact that SA has one of the lowest savings rates in the world is indicative of the low levels of financial inclusion in our economy. Over-regulation is a key factor in this. Even well-intentioned regulations such as the recent amendment to the National Credit Act and the Financial Intelligence Centre Act (Fica) have had unexpected negative consequences for the poor because they require documentation that many find difficult to supply. In a country where so many people operate in the informal economy, and we are desperate to drive economic growth and job creation, we simply cannot let financial regulations exclude the poor from the formal economy. One of the biggest risks of over-regulation is that it pushes people who are already vulnerable into the unregulated informal economy, where they have little recourse — in this case against unfair or illegal lending practices. The good news is that policy makers are increasingly aware of how important financial inclusion is in reducing poverty and driving inclusive economic growth. Treasury especially is trying to move away from the existing one-size-fits-all approach towards a system where risk is managed through a framework of principles and guidelines. It is clear that regulatory reform is needed in the financial sector, and with the right approach to regulation we can reduce predatory financial practices and increase financial inclusion — they do not have to be mutually exclusive. Those of us with access to the formal economy often take for granted the ability to participate in daily economic transactions that aren’t available to those who operate in a purely cash economy. Without the ability to safely and reliably save, insure, or access credit, individuals and small businesses are less able to weather financial setbacks, create wealth that can be transferred to the next generation, or take advantage of growth opportunities. Similarly, carrying cash and making cash payments is time-consuming and comes with significant safety risks — all factors that contribute to the headwinds faced by economically marginalised South Africans. A further impediment to financial inclusion emanates from our traditional banks as they face a key moment in their strategic choices. They are finding it hard to respond to disrupters as they embrace new technologies, reduce transaction fees and make their products and services more accessible. Capitec is leading the disruption in South Africa, although 2018 will see TymeDigital and PostBank enter the fray with their new offerings, pricing and expanded coverage enabling greater financial inclusion. Mobile operators and retailers also have a key role to play in advancing financial inclusion, but they are finding the challenge arduous. Improving financial inclusion in SA would have a massive effect on inclusive growth and the sustainable development of the informal economy. Small businesses create more than half of all employment opportunities in SA and the sector contributes 45% of the country’s gross domestic product. According to the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, SA’s rate of entrepreneurial activity is very low for a developing nation — a mere quarter of that seen in other sub-Saharan African countries. One of the reasons for this is our economy’s low levels of financial inclusion. Less than half of SA’s adult population has access to credit. Without access to credit, it is more difficult for small businesses to invest in capital and inventory, or to access much-needed bridging finance to even out cash flow issues. It is only once all South Africans are able to take advantage of opportunities brought about by the growth of the wider economy that we will adequately address the triple challenges of poverty, inequality and unemployment with efficacy. We don’t necessarily need sophisticated regulation to achieve this feat; rather, cognizant integration. • Craker is the CEO of IQ Business.