The ANC presidential race is expected to intensify this week as the party’s branches finalise nominations ahead of deadlines set for the end of the week. The issue was also likely to be one of the key agenda items that occupied leaders of the ANC at the party’s special national executive committee meeting that took place from the weekend to Monday. The party’s secretary-general, Gwede Mantashe, warned branches at the weekend that the deadline would not be extended, even though little more than 60% had completed their nomination processes last week. ANC veterans were set to hold a consultative conference on Friday, in the absence of the party’s leadership, to discuss various issues including challenges faced by the party. Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa will answer questions in the National Assembly on Thursday on a number of issues including the most recent Cabinet reshuffle. He will also face a grilling on how the country should deal with state capture in the absence of a judicial commission of inquiry, in light of revelations in President Jacob Zuma’s high court submission in October challenging the public protector’s recommendation of the inquiry. The president was expected to return to Parliament on Thursday to take questions from MPs. Parliament had 42 scheduled committee meetings this week, including briefings by the departments of basic education, health and social development on the issue of pupil pregnancies. On Wednesday, the standing committee on appropriations will be briefed by the Treasury, the Financial and Fiscal Commission and the Parliamentary Budget Office on South African Airways’ debt relief and recapitalisation funding. In September, the Treasury transferred R3bn to help the airline to repay part of its loan from Citibank. The DA in Gauteng will hold its provincial elective congress on Saturday as disclosures of ructions in the party continue to make headlines. Last week, candidates said they were aware there was "so much at stake" and would prioritise the interests of the country and the party during the vote. mahlakoanat@businesslive.co.za