A decision by Parliament’s mineral resources committee on how to deal with allegations of state capture in the sector has been held back by the unavailability of Mineral Resources Minister Mosebenzi Zwane. The committee has wanted to engage with the minister before working out how to approach the allegations. This follows an instruction made several months ago by National Assembly chairperson Cedric Frolick that several portfolio committees deal with the state capture allegations in their areas. So far only the public enterprises committee has launched an inquiry, and the transport committee is also engaging with the issues. Zwane was due to appear before the mineral resources committee on Tuesday but could not make it due to illness. He has also previously been unavailable. The committee held its last meeting on Wednesday so the minister will not be making an appearance before it this year. Parliament goes into recess on Thursday. DA MP Hendrik Schmidt said at the committee meeting on Wednesday that pleading illness was "the oldest trick in the book". He suggested that a meeting with the minister be scheduled for two weeks’ time, failing which National Assembly speaker Baleka Mbete be approached to subpoena him. ANC MPs accepted the minister’s apologies and proposed that the meeting with the minister be held next year. Committee chairman Sahlulele Luzipo said the committee had no option but to accept the minister’s apologies and a meeting in two weeks’ time would conflict with the ANC elective conference. Luzipo proposed that the meeting with Zwane should be the first order of business late in January, after Parliament returns from its December recess. The minister would be requested to attend a meeting on January 24 and, if unable to do so, to commit to an alternative date. Failing this the committee would have to decide on the way forward and possibly consider a subpoena. This proposal was accepted by the committee. It has been alleged in the leaked Gupta e-mails that Zwane was instrumental in the conclusion of the purchase of Optimum Coal Mine by Gupta-owned Tegeta Exploration & Resources from Glencore. He allegedly travelled to Zurich for this purpose, after which he proceeded to Dubai. Zwane’s department has also been in the news recently over the relocation of regional managers, some of whom are challenging the moves in court.