Anyone bewildered by the level of coloured and African support for the All Blacks isn’t thinking hard enough. During apartheid the Springboks were the pride and joy of white SA, so support for rival teams was a natural outlet for struggle anger. And while we’re no longer living in a society where racial exclusion is official policy, there’s still a strong sense on the political left that things haven’t changed near enough — either on the rugby field or in society at large. For that fairly sizeable community the axing of the Springbok brand would be an important symbolic step. Iconography matters a lot and in the progressive mind the Springbok is associated not with on-field sporting success but also continuing sociopolitical subjection. "No normal sport in an abnormal society" was the South African Council on Sport’s (Sacos’s) passionate cry through the 1970s and 1980s, and it still rankles that rugby is one realm where white players (and fans) continue to predominate. As someone who was brought up to support the "green and gold" — but who later got squarely behind the green, gold and black of the ANC — I’m agnostic on the emblem as such. I also recognise, though, that this is a debate that goes way beyond rugby, and beyond sport in general, to the very essence of what it means to be a South African. The Sacos stance was surely right in the heyday of apartheid, but how did things look before that? And what of the present day? It’s helpful to recall that the Springboks were introduced in 1906, at which point SA didn’t even exist. There were moves afoot to create a political union, but what was driving the process bore no relation to nation building as commonly understood. Nation states (a fairly new phenomenon) were all built on some sense of shared history, language, culture and values, but no such kinship or community spirit was present in the nascent SA. Instead ours was a union that was forced into being by the imperial superpower, over the protests (and corpses) of Afrikaners and without the slightest regard for the concerns of the native majority. SA came into existence for one reason only, and that was because the power holders in Whitehall wanted control of the minerals on the highveld. In Berlin in 1884, they had already co-authored the carving up of the rest of the continent, with zero regard for local demographics. But what they put together here was the mother of all geopolitical monstrosities. They knew about ethnicity and its conflictual resilience, but they went ahead and deliberately created the photo negative of the prototypical nation state; the equivalent of starting with Belgium and then adding in Burundi, Biafra and all of the Balkans. SA, in short, was profoundly abnormal from the start — though not in the way that made it the reigning pariah of the late 20th century. That ugly distinction came later, courtesy of apartheid and, more fundamentally, of the about-face the "civilised world" went through in the 1950s. Apartheid was an exclusionary, exploitative and racist programme, but it was very much of a kind with the policies, and the sensibility, that had underpinned the relationship between Europe and Africa (and Europeans and Africans in general) for the preceding few hundred years. Its proponents came to be cast as callous fascists, indifferent to the suffering they were causing, but actually all they were doing was extending the logic of the colonial order. The European elites, reeling from the implications of Nazism and Nagasaki, had summarily disavowed their long-held belief in Caucasian superiority and, virtually overnight, become loud exponents of nonracialism. SA’s whites came to notoriety by defying this new paradigm — but then again it represented, for them and them alone, an existential rather than a moral challenge. They got to be shunned for a crime against humanity, yet what really set them apart wasn’t brutality but borders; not a penchant for nastiness but the logic of numbers. In saying this I know I’m infringing the stand-out taboo of the last 50 years. It’s become de rigueur, especially among progressives, to insist that racial and ethnic identities and attachments are, at once, illusory, immoral and easily abandoned. "There’s only one race and that’s the human race" is the latter-day leftist mantra – and this is a view I’ve always been drawn to. I’ve been calling myself an internationalist for decades, but the historical record is hardly encouraging. On the contrary, humans appear to find the notion of self-determination virtually irresistible — witness the goings-on in Cyprus, Croatia, Crimea and, even more dispiritingly, the recent vote by the educated, affluent Catalans. So am I now advocating secession, or the dismemberment of the South African republic? No, I’m still happy to be part of what is, wittingly or otherwise, a great experiment in the mechanics of world government. I’m just tired of those who say this is the only morally proper position. I can’t see anything innately wrong with particularism, whether it’s based on ethnicity, ideology, religion or whatever — just as long as those preferring this option are willing to share decently with their neighbours. I believe it is possible to combine nationalism and neighbourliness; in fact it may be that a measured, self-confident version of the former is a sine qua non for a sustained expression of the latter. The way I see the world, it is insecurity rather than aggression or meanness that underpins so much of what ails the human race. And this applies at the individual and the collective level. So, in short, we need a new "national" convention aimed at developing a new (indigenous) collective vision. It should ideally be held in Maseru, capital of the archetypal bantustan, Lesotho, and all views should be welcomed, but zealousness and self-righteousness should be discouraged. And over the entrance the following slogan should appear, with acknowledgement to Cosas: "No normal anything in an abnormal society." What I must add is that whether we eventually rededicate ourselves to a single nation-in-the-making, or we opt for some kind of considered, negotiated apartness, it’s obvious that we need to do a lot more about wealth disparities, within countries and between them. The details are beyond the scope of this article, but I’m still strongly drawn to the idea that proper progressive taxation is the thinking person’s alternative to Marxism. • Heneck is a Cape Town businessman.