Former Zimbabwean finance minister Tendai Biti says the real challenge in the country starts now as it needs to rebuild the economy and reintegrate internationally. Biti was speaking on Radio 702 on Wednesday following Robert Mugabe’s resignation as president on Tuesday. The Zimbabwean opposition politician submitted a letter to parliament‚ tendering his resignation as head of state‚ a week after the military seized power. Biti said before Zimbabweans go to elections‚ the country needs to iron out a couple of issues. "We can’t go to an election when people are so alienated and isolated. We have certain fundamental things we have to deal with before we even think of an election‚" Biti said. "We need to ensure there are new fundamental rules to make everyone safe‚ to make constitutionalism solid." He said the country also needs to deal with the issue of the constitution‚ which bestowed too much power on one man, the president. "We have to stabilise the economy to allow ourselves to move forward." Zimbabwe needs peace‚ stability‚ nation building‚ political and institutional reform‚ economic reform‚ international reintegration and normalcy‚ Biti said. "These will require an inclusive approach…. Today the real challenge starts." Meanwhile, a Zimbabwean activist believes Mnangagwa cannot steer the country in the direction of rebuilding the nation. Addressing a media conference in Braamfontein‚ Johannesburg‚ ahead of Mnangagwa’s swearing in as interim president of Zimbabwe on Friday‚ Maureen Kademaunga suggested that Mnangagwa needed to address the sins of his past. “The president who is coming in‚ Mnangagwa‚ he was the chief architect of the Matebeleland Massacre in the 80s and I don’t see how he will be able to facilitate a process of national healing and reconciliation when he is also one of the perpetrators‚” said Kademaunga. During the killings in the early 1980s‚ thousands of people were tortured and murdered while women were raped in the army-led clampdown meant to neutralise the . Mnangagwa‚ who served as Mugabe’s vice president‚ was recently axed by the now former president. Mugabe was reportedly pushing for his wife‚ Grace‚ to replace Mnangagwa. Kademaunga said Zimbabweans should not be fooled into thinking Mugabe was the only one to blame for decades of problems in the country. “The people who are in the government and the military who have committed atrocities and who have been corrupt must also be brought to book but I think because they are focusing on personalities and taking down the man and trying to cleanse themselves in the process and making Mugabe the scapegoat‚” said Kademaunga. “So we still need to challenge the system and make sure that it does not just go against one man and his wife‚” she said. Mnangagwa‚ who was out of the country for the last several days‚ is expected back to assume his role as interim president. Zimbabwe is expected to hold fresh elections next year. - TimesLIVE 