The Hawks confirmed to Business Day on Wednesday that they are not investigating claims that State Security Minister Bongani Bongo looked to bribe an advocate in a bid to stifle the inquiry into state capture. On Sunday the Sunday Times reported that it had seen an affidavit in which evidence leader in the state capture inquiry Advocate Ntuthuzelo Vanara claims that Bongo said he was asked by acting Eskom board chairman Zethembe Khoza to bribe him to stop the inquiry from revealing incriminating information about them. Bongo was shuffled into Cabinet, replacing David Mahlobo as state security minister at a time where President Jacob Zuma is believed to be propping up support for himself within government. The National Prosecuting Authority told Business Day that it was not investigating the matter. The South African Police Service referred queries on potential investigations to the Hawks. Hawks spokesman Hangwani Mulaudzi said he had no knowledge of an investigation into the claims being at hand by the Hawks. He said he heard speculation that the Hawks would probe the matter but that they received no referrals thereto. "That is the first I have heard. Reports emerged that we are investigating and that was the first I have heard of it. I have checked. I have changed with General [Yolisa] Matakata and she says she is also no aware of such an investigation," said Mulaudzi. He said the Hawks would have no reason to refuse if a referral had been made for them to investigate the matter, but that no such referral had yet been made. "We have been looking through our latest requests for investigations and have not seen anything to that effect as yet. It also becomes important to keep in mind that cases are referred to the Hawks and not initiated by the Hawks automatically," he said. In a statement, Khoza rejected allegations that he asked Bongo to bribe Vanara into stymieing the state capture inquiry during the latter’s time as an MP. "I have never spoken to Mr Bongo, and I have never met him," said Khoza. He added that Eskom supported the parliamentary inquiry and that Eskom had previously written to the portfolio committee on public enterprises expressing its willingness to give evidence before the committee once the process got underway. "I have absolutely no reason why I, or Eskom, would want to collapse the inquiry when we have been calling for such a legally constituted platform so that we can place facts before the committee," Khoza said. magubanek@businesslive.co.za