Wendy McElroy is ready for most doomsday scenarios: a one-year supply of nonperishable food is stacked in a cellar at her farm in rural Ontario. Her blueprint for survival also depends on working internet: part of her money, assuming she needs some after the apocalypse, is in bitcoin. Across the North American countryside, preppers such as McElroy are storing more and more of their wealth in invisible wallets in cyberspace instead of stockpiling gold bars and coins. They won’t be able to access their virtual cash when a catastrophe knocks out the power grid or the internet, but that has not dissuaded them. Staunch survivalists are convinced bitcoin will endure economic collapse, pandemic, climate change catastrophes and nuclear war. "I consider bitcoin to be a currency on the same level as gold," she says. "It allows individuals to become self-bankers. When I fully understood the concepts and their significance, bitcoin became a fascination." At first glance, it seems counterintuitive that some of bitcoin’s most ardent proponents are people motivated by the belief that public infrastructure will collapse in times of social and political distress. Preppers see bitcoin as the money of the future, and its value has surged 10-fold in the past 12 months as supporters lauded it as a digital alternative to rival the dollar, euro and yen. It was born out of an anti-establishment vision of a self-governing society, a key attraction for those seeking unhindered access to their capital in case a huge shock shuts down the banking system. "Not too long ago, people in the prepper community were actively warning against crypto and now they’re all investing in it," says Tom Martin, a truck driver from Washington who runs a social media website for people interested in learning skills to survive disaster. "As long as the grid stays up, people will keep using bitcoin." In addition to gold, silver and stocks, Martin invests in bitcoin and the cryptocurrency’s peers, litecoin and steem, because they are easier to travel with, harder to steal and offer better protection in the event of the kind of societal breakdown that would unfold if a fiat currency such as the dollar collapsed. It’s hard to envision people walking around spending digital coins to buy canned beans or bottled water at a local supermarket when they don’t have electricity at home to charge their smartphones, let alone a working internet connection to access their digital wallets. "I doubt bitcoin is a safe haven from an extreme-risk environment. In that sense, bitcoin isn’t gold," says Charlie Morris, the London-based chief investment officer at Newscape Capital Advisors, which invests in cryptocurrencies. Preppers stock enough food and supplies to sustain them for months, if not years, and they expect that whatever governing structure emerges after the calamity will prioritise getting the web back up and running. "It may be difficult, if not impossible to access for a while, but once things start returning to some level of normality, then the blockchain will return as it was before the disaster," says Rob Harvey, a bitcoin investor who prepares for natural and nuclear catastrophe by learning and teaching survival skills, such as making a fire. "The blockchain does not need a specific place or a specific person to survive — that’s a strong survival tactic." Whatever doom-and-gloom scenario unfolds, McElroy has faith in bitcoin. She’s writing a book called Satoshi Revolution, inspired by the pseudonym of the person or people who created bitcoin in 2009 as an answer to the financial turmoil wrought by the global financial crisis. She says the digital currency breaks society’s dependence on a state that uses its monopoly over the issuance of money to dominate the economy, making the cryptocurrency a natural hedge against disaster. "Bitcoins move seamlessly through a world without states or borders, obeying only the command of individuals who choose to deal with each other. "Immune to currency manipulation and inflation, they do not serve the powerful elites at the expense of average people," she writes. Bloomberg