Glencore, a global mining and resources trading company, has offered the services of its chief financial officer to join independent directors at its Katanga Mining subsidiary. This would be to bolster financial controls, after a review found breaches leading to restatements of financial accounts. Katanga, which is listed in Canada and operates in the Democratic Republic of Congo, is now under scrutiny by the Ontario Securities Commission, which is investigating whether it had issued disclosures that misled the market and whether its risk disclosures met with "applicable requirements under certain international bribery, government payment and anticorruption laws". Glencore, which owns close to 86% of Katanga, has nominated three independent directors to replace the departure of three independent directors from the Katanga board. The new executive directors include Glencore’s own chief financial officer Steven Kalmin to upgrade Katanga’s corporate governance, compliance and control processes. Katanga’s chief financial officer, Jacques Lubbe, stayed on during the review and then tendered his resignation with immediate effect once the review was completed. He was replaced by Grant Sboros as of November 20. Katanga’s independent directors ordered the review and called in a Canadian law firm and an international accountant for assistance after the Ontario Securities Commission started an investigation into the company’s accounting practices. The internal review found an overstatement of copper cathode leading to inflated inventory numbers, an incorrect valuation of copper in the processing pipeline, and the faulty valuation of copper in stockpiles. There were also incorrect property, plant and equipment valuations for a number of years. In 2014, for example, there was an overstatement of 7,916 tonnes of finished copper leading to a $41.8m overstatement of inventories. Katanga had understated the cost of sales. Through "a series of journal entries", this matter was reversed the following year. Katanga has restated financial statements for 2015 and 2016. The review found that certain Katanga managers had received compensation from Glencore in the form of shares and cash and that this was not disclosed the shareholders.