How bad will the Cyber Monday sale of local government bonds be now that two of the big-three credit rating agencies rate rand-denominated government bonds as junk? At 7am on Monday morning, the rand had recovered slightly from the knee-jerk reactions of a 3% plunge against the euro and 2% plunge against the dollar and pound following the announcement at 11pm on Friday from S&P Global Ratings that it was downgrading SA’s local-currency bonds to the first tier of junk and foreign-currency bonds into the second tier. At the same time, Moody’s issued a credit report saying it would wait to see the government’s Budget in February before deciding whether to join S&P and Fitch in cutting SA’s credit rating to junk. It now remains to be seen which indices drop rand-denominated bonds, which the Treasury said represented about 90% of South African government debt. Reserve Bank governor Lesetja Kganyago recently warned SA that falling out of the indices that exclude junk bonds could result in tracker funds selling R180bn of South African government bounds. Novare Actuaries and Consultants issued a statement on Saturday saying: "S&P’s downgrade means that SA will now fall out of Barclays Global Aggregate Index (BGAI). While outflows are anticipated, they are not likely to be as large as what may be expected should SA fall out of the Citi’s World Government Bond Index (WGBI), which requires both Moody’s and S&P’s long-term local currency rating to be below investment grade before removing a country from the index." But this was disputed by other market commentators who said the World Government Bond Index would drop SA from its index because two out of three — S&P and Fitch — now rated the country as junk. The rand was trading at R14.10/$ at 7am, a recovery from its weakest level of R14.17/$ reached during the weekend after the S&P downgrade. The rand weakened nearly 3% against the euro on Friday, and was trading at R16.81/€ on Monday morning, a recovery from R16.90 at the weekend. The rand was at R18.78/£ after sinking to R18.87/£ at the weekend. The JSE’s banks are likely to suffer while miners gain on Monday from the weaker rand. S&P’s downgrade is bad news for the banks because their credit ratings are capped by their home country’s sovereign rating. S&P will inevitably issue statements shortly downgrading the JSE-listed banks to SA’s junk status. This in turn means the borrowing costs of South African banks will rise, a cost they will pass on to their customers. The only JSE retailer to celebrate Black Friday was Woolworths whose share rose 4.2% to R57.57.