A collective and co-ordinated approach by all spheres of government was required to tackle service delivery failures and maladministration at local government level, Treasury deputy director-general for intergovernmental relations Malijeng Ngqaleni said on Thursday. The multipronged strategic response should not simply focus on creditors but tackle the entire financial sustainability of municipalities as well as their operational inefficiencies. Ngqaleni said political leaders at national and provincial level had to exercise oversight and impose consequences for municipalities that persistently broke the law. Funded budgets, revenue enhancement, asset management and audit outcomes were key focus areas. She was calling for action while briefing Parliament’s two appropriation committees on the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill. The amendments arise from Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba’s medium-term budget policy statement. DA member of the finance committee of the Free State provincial legislature David van Vuuren emphasised the need for political intervention and consequence management to deal with the crisis in municipalities. The briefing by Ngqaleni and Treasury chief director for intergovernmental policy and planning Wendy Fanoe noted that at the end of June, municipalities owed R43bn to suppliers, whose livelihoods were threatened. On the other hand, municipalities were owed R128.4bn, which exceeded the total local government grant allocation for the year of R111bn. Municipalities owed R16bn for bulk electricity, R6.8bn for bulk water and R12bn for trade creditors, while they were owed R83bn by households, R27bn by the commercial sector and R7.4bn by state entities. Ngqaleni noted that 29 of the municipalities that had reached payment arrangements with Eskom were not honouring them, 18 were honouring them in full and nine were only partially honouring them. Treasury figures indicated that most of SA’s 257 municipalities collected less than half of their revenue targets and most presented budgets with an operational deficit. While there was significant underspending of municipal budgets, Ngqaleni said one had to ask whether there was cash to fund the expenditure in the first place. Municipalities underspent by R53bn in 2016-17. Ngqaleni said this reflected poor budgeting because they overstated revenue, undercollected by R30bn and overstated expenditure. ensorl@businesslive.co.za