A slump in US tech stocks, with Netflix falling 5.5% to $188.15 and its fellow "fang" stocks dropping more than 2% on Wednesday, weighed on Asian stock markets on Thursday morning. Fang is an acronym derived from Facebook, Amazon, Netflix and Google, and is used as collective noun for internet-based companies, which include Naspers’s Chinese associate Tencent. Tencent is likely to drag Naspers down on Thursday. The Hong Kong-listed tech company fell 2.33% to H$402 ahead of the JSE’s opening, contributing to a 1.3% drop in the Hang Seng index. South Korea’s Kospi index was down 0.7% and Australia’s S&P/ASX 200 index was down 0.6%. The rand was at R13.66/$, R16.20/€ and R18.40/£ at 7am. Platinum miner Tharisa said on November 14 it expected to report on Thursday headline earnings per share (HEPS) for the year to end-September grew nearly fourfold from the prior year’s $0.06. "While the platinum group metals basket price remained relatively flat year on year, the realised average chrome concentrate price increased to $200 a tonne for the financial year. This, combined with record annual platinum group metals and chrome production, resulted in the increase in the earnings of the company," Tharisa CEO Phoevos Pouroulis said in the trading update. Statistics SA will publish October’s producer price index (PPI) at 11.30am. Factory and farm gate inflation, as measured by the annual change in PPI, is expected to have slowed to about 5% from September’s 5.2%. Investec Bank economist Kamilla Kaplan said this was due to smaller petrol and diesel price increases in October than in September. "Additionally, food manufacturing, which holds the largest weighting in the PPI basket, is expected to continue reflecting decelerating rates of inflation, with the favourable grain supply outlook and deflation earlier along the supply chain," Kaplan said in her weekly economics note. Stats SA will publish October’s electricity generation and consumption figures at 1pm. Other statistical releases scheduled for Thursday include the 2017 statistics in brief report at 10am, September’s export and import value indices at 11.30am, October’s contract price adjustment provisions work group indices at 12pm, and the 2016 agricultural survey at 2.20pm.