Global consultancy firm McKinsey has set aside the R1bn that Eskom has demanded that it repay and was keen to do so, the head of the firm’s public and social sector practice, David Fine, said on Wednesday. Fine was giving evidence at the inquiry into state capture held by Parliament’s public enterprises portfolio committee. The money was paid for McKinsey’s work on a turnaround plan, but the Treasury had not approved the contract. "McKinsey does not want any tainted money. We went into a relationship with Eskom in good faith," Fine said. Eskom had given verbal confirmation that the contract had Treasury approval, but this turned out not to be the case. Fine said that even if the court ruled the contract was valid, McKinsey would still give the money back, not because the firm felt guilty about anything it had done, but because the contract did not have the required Treasury approval. Asked by evidence leader Ntuthuzelo Vanara why the firm did not simply go ahead with the repayment regardless of the outcome of the court case, Fine said Eksom did not want to pay the money twice. It needed to know whether the money should be paid back to Eskom or the fiscus. Fine said the question had been discussed with McKinsey’s global partners and there was agreement that the money should be paid back. He said he believed McKinsey had provided value in the work it did for Eskom on the turnaround plan, but that the fee structure should have been capped. However, he had subsequently queried whether Eskom had the management capacity to absorb the extent of the changes proposed in the plan. Eskom’s liquidity position had deteriorated, which posed the question whether the consultants had worked on the wrong problem. Eskom is also demanding the repayment of R564m from the Gupta-aligned Trillian Capital, which worked alongside McKinsey before discussions about it becoming a supplier development partner were terminated in March 2016. Fine said McKinsey had ended its relationship with Trillian early in 2016 because of concern over its ownership structure. McKinsey had been under the impression that Trillian, headed by Eric Wood, would be a black-empowered consultancy, but this was not the case. Fine said he also became concerned because some of the people involved in Trillian were potentially politically exposed individuals, or did not have the stature needed to build up a pre-eminent consultancy firm. Trillian failed an external due-diligence probe initiated by McKinsey. McKinsey also did work on Transnet’s market demand strategy and on preparing a business case for the procurement of 1,064 locomotives. It calculated a cost, excluding hedging costs, of R38.6bn over seven years, but Transnet in the end proceeded with the procurement on the basis of its own cost calculation of R54bn over three years. Fine said McKinsey had been told the difference was due to different assumptions on inflation, hedging and contract terms. McKinsey did work for Transnet with Regiments, which brought significant investment banking capabilities. However, concern about Regiments’s underperformance began to deepen in 2015. In February 2016, McKinsey informed Transnet that it would terminate its relationship with Regiments. ensorl@businesslive.co.za