Bengaluru — Gold on Thursday held close to a one-week low hit in the previous session, pressured by upbeat US growth data for the third quarter and Federal Reserve chairwoman Janet Yellen’s bullish view of the economy. A lack of clear drivers has kept gold between $1,265 and $1,300 an ounce throughout November, its narrowest monthly range in 12 years. Despite the volatility overnight, it was another subdued session across the precious metals complex in Asia on Thursday, with gold struggling above $1,285 an ounce consistently, MKS analyst Alex Thorndike said in a note. Spot gold was little changed at $1,283.95 an ounce at 4.44am GMT. On Wednesday, it fell 0.8% to touch its lowest since November 22 at $1,281.90. Still, bullion is heading for its first monthly gain since August, having risen 1% for the month. US gold futures were up 0.1% at $1,283.10. "We see gold prices remaining subdued over the next two months but after that it will start to rise," said Richard Xu, a fund manager at China’s biggest gold exchange-traded fund, HuaAn Gold. "It would be flat for a few days because the economy is great and the financial markets are in sync with inflation." The US economy has gathered steam this year and will warrant continued interest rate increases amid a strengthened global recovery, Yellen told Congressional leaders on Wednesday in her final scheduled testimony on Capitol Hill. Higher US interest rates would keep pressure on gold prices as investors seek returns in assets other than non-interest bearing bullion. Data showed the US economy grew faster than initially thought in the third quarter, notching its quickest pace in three years. Spot gold may break a support at $1,281 an ounce and fall more towards the next support at $1,277, according to Reuters technical analyst Wang Tao. UBS analysts said in a note: "While we remain cautious on it (gold prices) over three months, we regard setbacks as opportunities to add exposure. In the past, early stages of monetary policy normalisation hurt gold; but this time such adjustments resemble baby steps and likely will only be undertaken in sync with rising inflation." In other markets, the dollar index, which gauges the greenback against a basket of six major rivals, held steady as investors kept an eye on the progress of the US tax reform legislation that could see a likely decisive vote later this week. Silver fell to an eight-week low at $16.47 an ounce before recovering to $16.58. Palladium gained 0.7% at $1,020.75 an ounce, while platinum rose 0.6% at $942.49. In November, palladium has gained 4.1%, platinum is up 3.1%, while silver is down 0.7%. Reuters