Brussels — The collapse of talks on a new German government means the eurozone’s plans for deeper economic integration could be put on hold, eurozone officials said on Tuesday. German government coalition talks collapsed on Sunday night as the liberal Free Democratic Party pulled out after weeks of "exploratory" talks, plunging the economy into political uncertainty and raising the prospect of new elections. Eurozone leaders are to set a direction for more eurozone economic integration at a summit in December, at which Germany’s input is crucial. "As long as Germany does not have a clear position, it will by default not agree to anything. Therefore, delay is the most likely option," a senior eurozone official, involved in the integration talks, said. The summit is to launch six months of work that would lead to decisions in June 2018 on whether or not the bloc should have a budget, a finance minister and a eurozone assembly in the European Parliament. The deeper integration push, championed by French President Emmanuel Macron, also includes the transformation of the eurozone bail-out fund into a European Monetary Fund and the creation of a sovereign insolvency mechanism. "Things will go on hold until there is a formal acting German government," a second eurozone official said. "At this stage I don’t see what steps the leaders could take in December or June for deepening eurozone integration when there is a German government without a mandate," he said. Some officials said that a potential delay in the integration talks was not a big issue because they concerned the future architecture of the Economic and Monetary Union, now encompassing 19 countries. "There is nothing that makes new decisions on the EMU especially urgent, so I don’t believe this to be a real problem," a third senior eurozone official said. "The June deadline can always be moved, if need be," the official said. But other officials noted the initial timing of the talks was to make use of a "window of opportunity" in 2018, when no major eurozone countries, except Italy, or EU institutions had to face elections and were therefore free to focus on eurozone reforms. If the talks were delayed, decisions on key issues, often sensitive politically, could be pushed back towards 2019 — a year of elections to the European Parliament, the formation of a new European Commission and choosing new heads of the European Central Bank and the chairman of EU leaders. An official involved in preparations for the December summit said it would go ahead as planned. "National elections happening all the time, all over Europe, are no reason to stop our work." But others said they expected the mandate that leaders would give to the commission for further work on eurozone integration would probably be weaker than it would have otherwise been if no German government is in place by then. Reuters