London — World stocks continued to claw back losses on Friday after spending much of the week in the red, boosted by signs of progress in US tax reform and strong corporate results. The US House of Representatives passed a tax overhaul expected to boost share prices if it becomes law. The legislative battle now shifts to the Senate. Despite a bounce-back, however, global stocks were still on track for their second consecutive week of losses, their longest weekly losing streak since August. The US treasury yield curve remained on investors’ radar, reaching its flattest levels in a decade, reflecting a belief that the Federal Reserve will continue to raise interest rates. The MSCI world equity index, which tracks shares in 47 countries was up 0.1% on the day, but was heading for a 0.1% fall on the week. European shares were sluggish in early deals after the previous session’s strong recovery, with the Stoxx 600 index falling back 0.3% as disappointing company results and downgrades weighed. As earnings season drew to a close with 90% of US and European companies having reported, analysts said results were supportive but weaker than the previous quarters. "While they look good overall, the strong momentum apparent since [the first quarter] is now fading," said Société Générale analysts, adding that consensus earnings estimates were no longer being raised for US or eurozone stocks. Investors breathed a little easier on Friday, with high yield "junk" bond prices also recovering and market volatility easing. But it has been a bruising week — the US yield curve flattened for the third consecutive week, global high yield bond markets were on course for a second straight week of losses (the last time that happened was a year ago) and Wall Street volatility hit its highest in three months. On Friday the US yield curve flattened again on the expectation the Fed will keep tightening policy, pushing yields on the short end higher. At the same time, US inflation, although trending higher, is likely to remain subdued, limiting yields on longer-dated bonds. The spread between US two-year and 10-year yields narrowed 1.6 basis points. It was last at 64.34 basis points. In Europe, German yields steadied but remained on track for their biggest weekly drop since the end-October ECB meeting, as the stock market wobble pushed cash towards safe-haven assets. "The risk asset recovery and a more negative technical picture have put some pressure on bond markets," Société Générale strategists wrote, adding, however, that they did not expect a wider sell-off. A benign eurozone backdrop did, however, help compress yields on other eurozone debt, with French yield premiums over Germany falling this week to the lowest in two-and-a-half-year lows. The euro also enjoyed gains, up 0.2% against the dollar at $1.1793. Strong eurozone GDP figures helped the single currency recover fully from its end-October drop when the ECB extended its asset purchase programme. ECB president Mario Draghi said on Friday the central bank’s decision to extend the programme until September 2018 was key in pushing market expectations for the first rate increase further into the future. Meanwhile, the US dollar was dented by a report that special counsel Robert Mueller’s team last month subpoenaed President Donald Trump’s campaign for documents containing specified Russian keywords from more than a dozen officials. The greenback fell 0.3% against a basket of six major currencies. "The dollar’s temporary rally [since September] appears to have ended in early November, and the euro is now receiving broad-based support," wrote Unicredit analysts in a note. "Investors have probably increased their focus on good eurozone fundamentals, rewarding the common currency across the board. We agree and anticipate further widespread euro gains." Bitcoin was trading down 3.8%, at $7,560. Emerging stocks gained 0.6%, helped by the broadly risk-on mood. Oil prices were on track for weekly losses, slipping from two-year highs hit last week on signs that US supply is rising and could potentially undermine Opec’s efforts to tighten the market. US light crude stood at $55.53 a barrel, up 0.7% on the day but still within its trading range in the past couple of days. It was down 2.1% on the week. Brent futures hit a two-week low of $61.08 a barrel but last stood 0.3% higher at $61.53. It was down 3.1% for the week. Reuters