Business owners often struggle to go on vacation and leave their companies behind. This happens more often during the festive season when some companies are at their busiest and staff members go on leave. But taking a much-deserved break from your business may be the best thing you can do for yourself, so that you come back relaxed and refreshed. With a little bit of planning, you can ensure your business runs smoothly. Here are a few tips to get you going: Whether your vacation is scheduled for December, January or the Easter holidays, plan everything that needs to be done in advance. Plan at least two to three months ahead to make sure everything goes well, so that your personnel are briefed in time and they know what’s required of them while you’re away. If you interact with customers regularly, let them know when you will be back. Start by telling them a month in advance and remind them a few days before your scheduled trip. Speak to them about whom to contact when you’re away if there is anything urgent they may need. If your business gets busier during the festive season, getting additional help is something to consider. Whether you hire freelancers or temporary staff, a little bit of help goes a long way. Hiring a freelancer may cost you less than hiring full-time employees. Therefore, hire as many outsourced or temporary staff members as your budget can handle. Entrust someone capable with taking care of your business while you’re away. Hiring someone who has managerial experience is even better. If there are any emergencies that require your attention, give your staff members an emergency number where they can contact you. This way, you won’t necessarily have to check in with the office regularly. Boosting your staff morale will reap benefits for your company. If you plan to have staff members work overtime while you’re away, try to incentivise them. Compensation for the extra hours they’ve worked or an extra day off will give them something to look forward to and ensure they keep the momentum going despite the additional pressure during a busy month. If there are accidents at the office, knowing that you’re covered for any damage will prevent you from pulling out your hair during a stressful situation. Having business insurance is essential to keep you at ease while you’re away. This article was paid for by MiWay.