The Department of Water and Sanitation had become dysfunctional as a result of staff shortages, corruption and policy changes, the South African Water Caucus (SAWC) said in a report released on Monday. Media reports have piled up about the department’s inaction over the drought in the Western Cape, about billions of rand in municipal debt and ballooning costs for projects such as the Mzimvubu dam in the Eastern Cape and the Lesotho Highlands Water Project. The SAWC, formed in 2002, includes about 20 community organisations and trade unions. It asked a team at its last biennial meeting to look into concerns about this department and will present its report to Parliament’s portfolio committee on water and sanitation this week. The report “lays bare a situation of institutional paralysis within the department and associated deterioration in financial management, service delivery, policy coherence and performance”, the SAWC said. The report, which is based on publicly available information as well as access to information requests, showed the department had 900 vacant posts and since 2008 has had seven different directors-general. There was serious concern about financial management, the SAWC said. At the end of March, R1.5bn was owed to contractors, of which R921m was paid by September and the rest would only be paid in 2018. The department owed R2.6bn to the Reserve Bank and had committed to bring this down by R700m by March. This meant infrastructure work at some dams would slow down. The department has overspent on some programmes and underspent on others. The auditor-general has qualified its accounts because it lacked adequate controls. The department complained that its budget was cut but it was not collecting the money owed by municipalities and other water users, with about R9.8bn owed by end-March. The SAWC said there were worrying reports of corruption associated with projects, particularly interference in Lesotho Highlands Water Project contracts to favour LTE Consulting. The department’s policy direction was unclear, SAWC said. Rather than implementing the National Water Act properly, the minister had proposed a raft of new plans, bills and reviews. There was also uncertainty about the powers of catchment management agencies after various delegations and revocations of responsibilities. The minister, Nomvula Mokonyane, appeared to have decided to consolidate the nine regional agencies into one national agency, in direct contravention of existing national water policy requiring decentralisation and public participation in water governance. There had been no public consultation on this plan, the SAWC said. No Blue Drop or Green Drop reports into the functioning of water and wastewater treatment works had been released since 2013, the SAWC said, which had serious implications for water safety and quality. Issuance and compliance monitoring of water-use licences was in disarray, it added. • The SA Reserve Bank said the report was incorrect in stating that the department of water affairs and sanitation owed it R2.6bn. The Reserve Bank does not provide loans or financing to government departments, it said.