Moscow — The South African government would review its nuclear plans as part of its response to the recession, Energy Minister Mmamoloko Kubayi said in Moscow, Russia, on Wednesday. Kubayi, in Moscow for the AtomExpo nuclear conference and leading a delegation from SA, also said that she viewed nuclear energy as part of a diverse energy mix, including renewable resources and coal. However, it was too early to say when a procurement process could restart for SA’s nuclear project, she told a news conference. “We will do the nuclear project at a scale and pace that we can afford. So we will look at that completely, if we need to review the scale we have obviously to go back,” Kubayi told a news conference. In response to a question on which company SA might choose to build new nuclear reactors, Kubayi said it was important to go for “the most experienced people who have a track record”. Russian state firm Rosatom is a contender to build the nuclear reactors and has been talking up its chances of winning the contract, given delays and cost overruns at French competitor Areva and Japanese-owned Westinghouse. Kubayi met Russian Energy Minister Alexander Novak and Rosatom head Alexei Likhachev on her visit to Russia, agreeing with Likhachev that South African and Russian technical teams would initiate discussions on cooperation. She said it was too early to give an exact date on when the procurement process for the nuclear project could restart and that South Africa was reviewing intergovernmental agreements with many countries following the High Court ruling against the Russian nuclear pact. She said: “In a few weeks we should be able to give an indication (of the procurement restart date), once the internal cabinet processes have been concluded.” Eskom’s nuclear build programme was sent back to square one by an order of the Western Cape High Court in April, which set aside the two determinations issued by former energy minister Tina Joemat-Pettersson that laid the basis for the nuclear procurement. SA’s economy was confirmed to be in a technical recession earlier this month, when data showed the economy shrank 0.7% in the first quarter, after a 0.3% contraction in the final quarter of 2016. Reuters, with Staff Writer