Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba reaffirmed his support for the Reserve Bank’s independence of on Friday, and the ANC added its voice. Gigaba said the public protector had overstepped the mark this month in suggesting changes to the Bank’s inflation-targeting mandate. The public protector’s call for an overhaul of the Bank’s mandate rattled investors, hit the rand and exposed worsening divisions between state institutions. "The public protector does not have the power to direct Parliament to amend the Constitution," Gigaba told business leaders at the start of the ANC’s policy conference. "These recommendations should have been directed at the finance ministry. We should all insist on the independence of the Reserve Bank." Hours later, ANC treasurer-general Zweli Mkhize said the party did not believe the public protector had the power to ask Parliament to change Bank's mandate, clarifying that the party’s position matched Gigaba's. Earlier this month, investors took flight when Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane said the Bank’s current mandate — centred on maintaining currency and price stability — was focused on a "few commercial interests" rather than boosting the economy. The Reserve Bank immediately rejected that, saying Mkhwebane’s office had no business in making recommendations about how it is run, and this week filed a court challenge asking for the recommendation to be set aside. Parliament and the ANC also rejected the recommendation, but the country’s largest union backed the proposal. Critics of President Jacob Zuma see the public protector’s comments as an attempt to undermine the Bank’s authority as part of a broader attack on state institutions, including the finance ministry, the South African Revenue Service (SARS) and the public protector’s office. Zuma rejects such criticism. Drastic measures Gigaba also called for "drastic measures" to kick-start economic growth, with SA mired in its first recession in nearly eight years. "Should the main indicators continue to disappoint any further, we may have to seek assistance from quarters we have thus far avoided," Gigaba said, without elaborating. The rand extended its losses against the dollar on Friday, trading 0.7% lower at 9.30am, while bonds weakened after Gigaba’s comments on the possibility of seeking outside assistance. Gigaba said the country needed developmental coalitions if it is to undertake the drastic measures required to recover economically. Gigaba promised the business community that the ANC's policy gathering would discuss an action plan to be launched in a few days‚ aimed at boosting business confidence. Some of the initiatives to be undertaken to realise transformation include the channeling of 60% of government business to black audit firms and a co-ordinated government value chain system that would help previously disadvantaged business people gain access to markets. He conceded, though, that neither these goals nor the National Development Plan would come to fruition if government needed to “push an unwilling private sector through legislation”. “Unless we take drastic measures now‚ we will not escape the low-growth trap. We may have to seek assistance from quarters we have thus far avoided‚” Gigaba explained. He said the government would also explore the introduction of penalties against state-owned companies that worked against the rise of small businesses by not paying them for services rendered on time. Alexander Forbes’s Bonga Mokwena‚ who is also a member of Business Unity SA‚ said the time wasted on debating the merits and demerits of radical economic transformation could be better used to find solutions to the economic gridlock in the country. He said the need for a fast-tracked form of transformation was a given. “It is important that we do not waste our energies and time to argue and debate how we define this challenge‚ what do we call it. It’s amazing the amount of energy we spend on a simple thing‚ whether we call it inclusive change or radical‚ the fact is‚ whether we call this challenge radical‚ or inclusive — it does not change that in 23 years the progress we made is not adequate.” The ANC’s radical economic transformation policy will be one of the main issues discussed during the five-day conference‚ which will also dedicate two days to analysing the state of the ANC. Reuters, with Theto Mahlakoana