Bengaluru — Gold prices edged higher on Friday as the dollar softened and risk aversion due to geopolitical events buoyed the safe-haven appeal of the metal. "Risk aversion is on the rise, mainly due to what’s happening in the Middle East and also the news about China cracking down on some loans made overseas last year," said Richard Xu, a fund manager at China’s biggest gold exchange-traded fund, HuaAn Gold. China’s banking regulator had ordered a group of lenders to assess their exposure to offshore acquisitions by a handful of companies that had been on an overseas buying spree, two people familiar with the matter said on Thursday. Spot gold was up 0.1% at $1,251.96/oz, as of 4.43am GMT. It was down 0.1% for the week, and was headed for a third consecutive weekly fall. US gold futures for August delivery climbed 0.3% to $1,252.60/oz. The political situation in the US, the UK, and North Korea-related developments were among the other factors creating a safe-haven demand for gold, said Brian Lan, MD at gold dealer GoldSilver Central in Singapore. Tension rose as North Korea carried out another test of a rocket engine that the US believes could be part of its programme to develop an intercontinental ballistic missile, a US official told Reuters on Thursday. Gold is used as an alternative investment during situations of political and financial uncertainty. Investors will keep an eye on key US economic data due next week for cues on the US Federal Reserve’s rate increase decision. US data due next week include the June consumer confidence indicator, pending home sales, crude oil inventories, revised first-quarter GDP and the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index. "The Fed has mentioned it will most likely raise rates one more time. The data will be important to know whether it is a favourable time for the central bank to raise rates," Lan added. Spot gold could retest a resistance at $1,254/oz, with a good chance of breaking above this level and rising more towards the next resistance at $1,262, said Reuters technical analyst Wang Tao. The dollar was down 0.1% against a basket of currencies, drifting away from the near one-month peak of 111.790 hit on Tuesday. Among other precious metals, silver rose 0.4% to $16.60/oz. Platinum climbed 0.2% to $922.10/oz, while palladium slipped 0.1% to $882.75/oz. Reuters