Profit takes a huge knock, but rights issue has stabilised finances and projects elsewhere in Africa are kicking in PPC says it attained several key milestones in the year to March 2017, including a R4bn rights offer, which "stabilised" its capital structure. However, the cement producer endured a "challenging" financial year. Gearing fell to "more sustainable levels" following the offer, but PPC posted a comprehensive loss of R523m in the period. Much of this was from servicing debt for its rest-of-Africa cement projects. "Our results were impacted by a liquidity crisis precipitated by an unexpected S&P debt downgrade, which resulted in abnormal finance costs being incurred in relation to a liquidity and guarantee facility put in place to ensure that PPC could meet its financial bond repayment obligations," CEO Darryll Castle said on Wednesday. Group revenue rose 5% to R9.6bn in the year as earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation fell 13% to R2.1bn. Profit for the year plunged 96% to R27m from R731m previously, following the rights issue dilution and empowerment charges. However, the steady ramp-up of PPC’s new Rwanda plant, the commissioning of its milling plant in Zimbabwe and the completion of major projects in Ethiopia and the Democratic Republic of Congo should help offset increasing competition in SA and directly across the country’s borders. The projects have resulted in group cement capacity rising about 33% to 11.4-million tonnes a year. "The big story is that we have developed these big projects in [the rest of] Africa substantially on time and on budget," Castle said. "So, now we move into a completely new phase." Now that the rest-of-Africa plants were coming online with no major technical issues, annual capex would halve. But Castle acknowledged market worries that the group operated in SA, Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of Congo — all led by controversial leaders. President Joseph Kabila refused to step down when his term ended in 2016. "Based on management guidance … we expect operating cash flows from Rwandan and Ethiopian operations to be sufficient to service their debt burdens," Gareth Visser, an analyst at Avior Capital Markets, said on Wednesday. "Despite the challenging operating conditions, PPC’s Zimbabwean operations are cash positive and should generate sufficient free cash flow to service the in-country debt burden. "Our biggest concern lies with the DRC, where there is a risk that free cash flows may not be sufficient to meet in-country obligations given price pressure, competition and geopolitical instability," he said. The unwinding of parts of the group’s broad-based black economic empowerment transaction resulted in a cash inflow of R1bn, with a corresponding accounting charge in the year. The tax rate was significantly higher than in the previous year, mainly because of the non-deductibility of the empowerment transaction charge and foreign exchange losses, as well as withholding taxes on dividends in foreign jurisdictions. PPC said operating volumes were affected by "excessive rainfall" in the last quarter of the financial year. In addition, the South African cement market was highly competitive, resulting in constrained pricing.