Secretary to Parliament Gengezi Mgidlana has taken special leave while allegations against him are investigated. The allegations of mismanagement and corruption - which Mgidlana has denied - were made by the National Education Health and Allied Workers Union (Nehawu) and have been referred to Parliament's independent audit committee for investigation. The union has demanded that Mgidlana be suspended rather than be granted special leave but the presiding officers of Parliament have acceded to his request for special leave. Among the union's complaints are that Mgidlana abused his powers and spent R1.8m on international benchmarking trips to other parliaments. It submitted its complaints to the public protector last year. The DA and EFF have also protested against Mgidlana's performance. Nehawu's hostility towards Mgidlana has been fuelled by stalled wage negotiations with Parliament. The presiding officers of Parliament - speaker of the National Assembly Baleka Mbete and National Council of Provinces chairperson Thandi Modise - emphasised in a statement on Friday that, "consistent with the principles of natural justice", Mgidlana remained innocent until proven otherwise. One of the two deputy secretaries will be appointed to act for Mgidlana in his absence. The statement said Mgidlana had requested to be placed on special leave pending the outcome of the investigations. DA chief whip John Steenhuisen welcomed the fact that Mgidlana had taken special leave, saying the DA had had longstanding concerns about his "maladministration" of Parliament. "It is our earnest hope that the independent audit committee that has been tasked with investigating the allegations will do so thoroughly and without fear or favour," Steenhuisen said. "Parliament cannot afford a whitewash and the provisions of the Financial Management of Parliament and Provincial Legislatures Act must be brought to bear on Mgidlana," he said. "We also hope that this committee will co-operate with the Office of the Public Protector, which is investigating Mgidlana for abuse of power and other transgressions. "Mgidlana has been allowed to mismanage Parliament for far too long. He has antagonised and bullied staff with seeming impunity, and has facilitated questionable political appointments to senior management positions which now threaten the independence and integrity of the legislature."