The judicial review application on the remedial action in former public protector Thuli Madonsela’s state capture report puts its implementation on hold, President Jacob Zuma argued in court papers on Monday. The president is opposing an application by the DA seeking to force him to comply with the remedial action in Madonsela’s report since he did not apply for a stay of execution before he took it on judicial review. Zuma has lodged a conditional counter application asking the court to give him the opportunity to obtain a stay by court order if it found that one was needed. “No prejudice would be suffered by any of the parties to this application if the relief is granted as the review application is provisionally set to be heard in October,” he said. Zuma said the conditional counter application was only necessary if the court found a stay of the implementation of the remedial action was required. In her remedial action‚ Madonsela directed that a commission of inquiry into the allegations of state capture be conducted and that Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng appoint the sole judge to preside over it. Zuma is taking the prescribed action on judicial review, arguing that only he has the constitutional prerogative to establish a judicial commission of inquiry. This is despite the fact that the president himself being implicated. Hundreds of thousands of leaked e-mails between members of the Gupta family and their associates have once again put the spotlight on the president and those close to him. “A president is in law not entitled to just comply with a report of the public protector if there are reasons to doubt its correctness,” the president argued in his affidavit filed in the High Court in Pretoria. “To do so will amount to a mechanical response; this is irreconcilable with the logic and rights exercisable by a person adversely affected by such a determination,” he said. Zuma accepted that the public protector’s remedial action was binding unless set aside by a court. However, whether or not the action was stayed by a review application remained a tangential issue, he argued.