Hours after the ANC condemned protests outside journalist Peter Bruce’s house by members of the Black First Land First (BLF) movement, President Jacob Zuma praised media freedom in SA, saying his party advocated the promotion of journalists’ rights. Members of Gupta-linked Black First Land First formation staged a provocation outside the home of editor-at-large of Tiso Blackstar, Peter Bruce, on Thursday. Business Day editor Tim Cohen was also caught up in the fray after one BLF protester assaulted him. The ANC said on Friday morning that it "condemned" in the "strongest possible terms" the intimidation of Bruce and his family. Zuma said during his opening address to the ANC policy conference that freedom of the press was “enshrined in the Constitution”. He made no mention of the death of senior SABC producer Suna Venter, who was a target of sustained attacks for in the months prior to her death for being part of the SABC Eight, a group of journalists who fought for fairness at the public broadcaster. Zuma said: “Our democracy is also characterised by freedom of the media which is enshrined in the constitution, the ANC promotes the rights of journalists to work freely and without hindrance in our country.  We also promote media independence from various interests, professionalism as well as balanced reporting at all times." Party reacts The ANC said in its statement on Friday: “The African National Congress condemns in the strongest possible terms the actions of a group purported to be members of BLF who are reported to have gone to ... Peter Bruce’s home‚ with the purpose to intimidate him and his family. “It is further reported that the action of the alleged BLF members was a statement against Mr Bruce’s views and ideological positions. This manner of handling differences is an antithesis to the tolerant society appreciative of divergent views we seek to build.” The protesters demanded that Bruce write about the transgressions of white monopoly capital.  Read the ANC's full statement: