Former tourism minister Derek Hanekom gave his reasons on Monday why he should not be removed as chairman of the ANC’s national disciplinary committee. Party secretary-general Gwede Mantashe had written to Hanekom, asking him to explain why he should remain chairman of the committee. The ANC was considering removing Hanekom from his position because of his tweets before the vote of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma. Hanekom, a national executive committee member of the ANC, was at the forefront of a "vote by conscience" campaign among MPs before the recent parliamentary vote on the motion tabled by the DA. While the ANC position was that its MPs had to vote against the motion, several of its MPs openly advocated voting with the opposition on Zuma. In one of his tweets, Hanekom said: "Dispel this notion of ‘voting with the opposition’. We must vote against state capture, massive looting and corruption. Vote for change." Mantashe said that the tweets prejudiced the committee. "As a consequence, the independence and integrity of the office of the disciplinary committee has been placed in jeopardy and could legitimately be questioned by comrades who appear before this body in the future," said Mantashe. ANC treasurer-general Zweli Mkhize said earlier in August that it would be up to the party’s national executive committee, its highest decision-making body between conferences, to decide on Hanekom’s fate. Hanekom tweeted that he would submit his letter to Mantashe on Monday. "To all media who have been trying to get hold of me today, and wanting interviews: sorry. Been busy. The letter will be submitted today." Earlier, he had said he would not reveal the contents of his letter. "Love you all of course. But no interviews. I regard this as an internal organisational matter," Hanekom tweeted. He is said to have also tabled a motion of no-confidence in Zuma in the national executive committee a few months ago, which was defeated. He is one of the ANC MPs accused of voting in support of the DA-sponsored motion of no confidence in Zuma. Earlier in August, Mantashe said the national executive committee had decided to discipline at least three MPs who had publicly declared they would vote against Zuma. This was after Zuma had said that the rebel MPs had "broken the constitutional laws of the ANC". The ANC defeated the DA-sponsored motion by a narrow margin, but 30 to 40 ANC MPs are believed to have voted against the president. Another ANC member who openly campaigned for a vote of conscience, Dr Makhosi Khoza, was recently stripped of her position as chairwoman of the public service and administration portfolio committee in Parliament, a decision which she is contesting. Khoza said that due process was not followed in her removal. She also faces a disciplinary hearing in KwaZulu-Natal. phakathib@businesslive.co.za