The proposed bid for Holdsport by Brian Joffe’s Long4Life is being opposed by some minority shareholders of the retail company who want the offer to be revised. In July, Long4Life offered Holdsport shareholders a choice between 12.1 of its shares for each Holdsport share, or 11.2 shares plus R5 cash. The cash offer is capped at R204m. Holdsport’s businesses include Sportsmans Warehouse and Outdoor Warehouse. A shareholder, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said on Friday that while the strategic benefits of the tie-up were understood, "we don’t believe there is an appropriate valuation being applied to the business [Holdsport]. "We think the ratio is inappropriate and attributes a very high valuation to the Long4Life shares." Long4Life is believed to be trading at a high premium compared with its peers, which trade at a discount, but offer a high net asset value. Another minority shareholder said while they were not happy with the proposed offer, they were unlikely to oppose it. He was not surprised that some shareholders were aggrieved, because Holdsport was a "great business" and it could be worth more than was being offered. "It’s an opportunistic offer," said the shareholder. "It’s not an amazing price.... But we can still get the benefit through shares in Long4Life." Holdsport increased total sales 5.8%, to R1.8bn in the year to February. Its chief financial officer, Cobus Loubser, said the proposed transaction was under review by an independent expert to determine if it was fair and reasonable. "It is our understanding that many shareholders support the proposal, but those who don’t support the process will have an opportunity to exercise their rights at the shareholders meeting," he said. A Long4Life representative said Holdsport’s management was in favour of the transaction and major shareholders had signed irrevocable undertakings to support it. Holdsport will be Long4Life’s second acquisition since it listed on the JSE in April. It has bought beauty group Sorbet. mochikot@bdlive.co.za