The country needs a strong ANC but the party is now at its weakest, says presidential hopeful Mathews Phosa. A record number of candidates are contesting for the party presidency in December. However, the frontrunners remain national executive committee member Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, backed by President Jacob Zuma and his allies, and Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, formally backed by Cosatu and the ANC’s Northern Cape branch. While Phosa’s presidential bid is unlikely to succeed, his insight into the state of the party as its former treasurer-general is instructive. On Wednesday, he said the ANC had lost its character of tolerance and its culture of debate. Its "intellectual engagement and intellectual elasticity" had been lost, he said. This was why criticism of Zuma was dealt with swiftly and harshly. "I am part of ‘let’s revive it’. I hear some are saying we are ready for a split after December conference, but that is my fear. "They feel, what is the point … [but] it can’t be the fall-back. We can’t give up on the ANC." Phosa has held several leadership positions in the ANC and left in 2012 to be an ordinary member after losing at conference, where he contested the position of deputy president. He has recently been part of the Umkhonto we Sizwe council that wanted Zuma to step down following the constitutional ruling on Nkandla and over the leaked e-mails and allegations of state capture. The council is also unhappy with Zuma’s leadership style and requested a consultative conference in July, which did not take place. "The president must go now. If he goes, that will open new debate in the ANC," said Phosa. "The ANC is in denial. By rights, the NEC [national executive committee] and NWC [national working committee] structures were supposed to have been dissolved. "They are conflicted and have been protecting the president," he said. He said there were no consequences for any wrongdoing by ANC leaders. "The leaders support the president because they do not want to step down from their positions," Phosa said. "I can tell you, the president is going to be a very lonely man when his term expires. He won’t receive phone calls." Phosa said he was being guided by the ANC branches, which was why he was running for the presidency. "The country needs a unifying leader and there is a way of emulating the late Nelson Mandela. We need a leader who will give the nation hope.… who will be inclusive."