ANC members were excited to see presidential hopeful Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma at the Pimville Community Centre in Soweto on Sunday, but veteran Winnie Madikizela-Mandela did not leave her house. Dlamini-Zuma, ANC Women’s League president Bathabile Dlamini, league secretary-general Meokgo Matuba and Umkhonto We Sizwe Military Veterans Association national executive committee member Carl Niehaus visited Madikizela-Mandela at her house in Orlando West, Soweto. Speculation was rife that Madikizela-Mandela was not comfortable meeting Dlamini-Zuma. The former AU head met Madikizela-Mandela, who is ill, in her bedroom. However, Dlamini-Zuma told journalists outside the house that she had been warmly received by Madikizela-Mandela. "Winnie is our hero," Dlamini-Zuma said. "We can’t go too far without touching base with her. "Even last month, I was here touching base with her." Asked what why she had visited Madikizela-Mandela, Dlamini-Zuma said: "She wants to know how we are doing. We get wisdom from her." Dlamini-Zuma said that Madikizela-Mandela supported the idea that it was time for a female president to lead the ANC and the country. "She has spoken about that [a] long time ago," Dlamini-Zuma said. "She believes also that it is time we have a woman president," she said. At the Pimville Community Centre, Dlamini — who is also the Social Development Minister — lashed out at some ANC leaders who have questioned whether the governing party is ready for a female president. "That question is reactionary and problematic," she said. Dlamini said there was interest throughout the country for Dlamini-Zuma to replace President Jacob Zuma. "Our candidate is highly disciplined," Dlamini said. "She understands women issues. I am sure when she is the president, she will ensure that we are not treated as objects." The Dlamini-Zuma convoy included vehicles with images of her face and the message: "ANC breaks record. First woman president." When Dlamini-Zuma took to the podium at the community centre to speak to ANC members about radical economic transformation, the crowd applauded and burst into a song, singing, "We are ready for Nkosazana." Dlamini-Zuma said it always felt good to be in Soweto. "Soweto is a place where the ANC feels at home and continues to feel at home," Dlamini-Zuma said. "Soweto and the ANC are one thing. What I am saying is that the ANC must win here." She reiterated that the material conditions of people needed to be changed and that radical economic transformation, which is being championed by the ANC Youth League, should not be a threat to anyone. "The threat is the status quo," Dlamini-Zuma said. "If we continue building an army of unemployment, that is the threat. That is why our campaign is radical economic transformation now or never." Dlamini-Zuma warned that if radical economic transformation did not happen, there would be instability in the country.