Yet another pro-Cyril Ramaphosa subregion of the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal is crying foul after its powers were abruptly taken away. Last Tuesday leaders of the Umsinga subregion, under the ANC’s Inkosi Bhambatha region, were informed that their powers of calling a meeting and co-ordinating branches had been taken away by the party’s regional executive committee (REC). The stripping of the subregion’s powers come just weeks after the ANC provincial executive committee (PEC), which is strongly campaigning for former AU chairwoman Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma to succeed her former husband President Jacob Zuma as ANC president, stripped the powers of the Lower South Coast region, whose leaders have come out in support of Ramaphosa. The Lower South Coast has since appealed against this decision to the national executive committee (NEC). The meeting between the National Working Committee and the Lower South Coast region to hear the appeal was held in the South Coast last Monday. In 2016, the PEC disbanded the Emalahleni regional leadership, which had been at the forefront in campaigning for former premier Senzo Mchunu, now a Ramaphosa ally. Early in 2017, the far north region was stripped of its powers while the same fate befell the Harry Gwala region. Critics say all these regions are suspected of being sympathetic to Ramaphosa’s campaign. Zitha Zuma, chairman of the Umsinga subregion on Sunday said they were still considering their option after the surprise stripping of their powers. He said the decision was conveyed by regional secretary Linda Ngubane. "He arrived in our meeting not even with a letter to explain why we were being disbanded. The meeting lasted no longer than 10 minutes and he (Ngubane) said he is not going to entertain any questions. He said if we had any questions we should address it to regional chairperson Bheki Lembede. He told us that he had been sent to inform us that we can no longer call meetings and co-ordinate the works of the branches," Zuma said. According to Zuma, although no reason was given for the decision, they suspect this has to do with the fact that the subregion has been campaigning for Ramaphosa to succeed Jacob Zuma as the president of the ANC and of the country. Zuma said the region had ignored many complaints that Umsinga had brought from its branches. "The region did not address countless complaints and this affected us during the local government election. Hence we are surprised by their sudden action, so late." Zuma added that towards the Polokwane conference in 2007, Umsinga’s network of branches were in the forefront in supporting Jacob Zuma to succeed then President Thabo Mbeki. "The majority of the branches here are asking why the ANC’s Eye of the Needle document is not used when electing the new leadership. They are saying that they must be engaged on why Deputy President Ramaphosa must be ignored when he had been groomed for the position of the president. "What angers us is that it is becoming a trend that when the term of an incumbent is coming to an end, they want to tell ANC members who they must elect, they start coming up with things like women are ready to lead when they did not see this when they came into power," Zuma said. However, Bheki Lembede, the chairman of Inkosi Bhambatha region, denied that they had decided to strip the powers of the subregion because of its leaning towards Ramaphosa. "That is not true. The decision [to strip the powers of the sub-region] was taken after a number of complaints by the branches that the subregion was not doing its work correctly. So it cannot be correct that we took the decision because they support Ramaphosa. "As far as we are concerned the branches of the ANC have not pronounced themselves formally on the leadership issues. Individual leaders may have taken positions but not the branches. The branches themselves may have held informal discussion but the formal processes of nomination starts in September and we expect the branches to start formal discussions only then," he said. Meanwhile, leaders of the Lower South Coast region said they expect the decision on the outcome of their appeal to be taken as early as this week. "We put in a strong case during the appeal and the PEC was also given an opportunity to state its case. We are eagerly awaiting for the outcome of this process and we are very hopeful that our region’s powers will be reinstated," said Mzwandile Mkhwanazi, Lower South Coast regional secretary.