In a bid to defuse a potential postelection crisis, Kenya’s re-elected president urged the country’s opposition leader, Raila Odinga, to order his supporters off the streets and to take his claims of vote-rigging to the courts, Matina Stevis writes. President Uhuru Kenyatta’s appeal came after a weekend of election-related violence in some of Nairobi’s poorest areas and a death toll that by Monday had reached 17, according to the Kenyan Red Cross. On Sunday Odinga urged thousands of his supporters to go on strike and to reject the official election results. Ultimately, though, Odinga reluctantly agreed to take his claims to court. In an in-depth report on the post-election mood in Nairobi, Stevis and Africa bureau chief Joe Parkinson find the hotly contested election has laid bare Kenya’s tribal and economic divisions. Zambia’s jailed opposition leader, Hakainde Hichilema, was released from prison on Wednesday. The move to end Hichilema’s four-month detention came amid mounting international pressure on President Edgar Lungu. Zambia’s High Court ruled that Hichilema should be freed after the state prosecutor dropped treason charges against the 55-year-old businessman. The release appeared to mark a retreat by Lungu from a crackdown on opposition since narrowly winning elections in 2016. Hichilema, who had been charged with trying to overthrow the government, had been set to go on trial on Monday. If convicted of treason, he would have faced the death penalty. Zambia’s copper miners are facing a new challenge after the state utility slashed electricity supplies to First Quantum, the country’s largest producer, amid an escalating dispute about tariffs, Bariyo writes. Fellow miner Glencore suspended production recently after rejecting a 55% electricity tariff hike. The row could hinder efforts by Zambia’s miners, which are already struggling to recover from years of low metal prices and power shortages, to raise output by 10% this year. Pakistan’s stock market continued to weaken this week, tumbling almost 5% amid continued political uncertainty. The country’s benchmark KSE 100 index is now down more than 18% from its pre-MSCI-upgrade high in late May. As well as losing favor among investors, Pakistan, along with its fellow South Asian frontier markets Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, is seeing a noticeable decline in remittances, according to London-based Capital Economics. The firm believes low oil prices have helped suppress remittances, as much of the flow comes from the Gulf region. With remittances accounting for a substantial chunk of the three countries’ GDP, Capital Economics’ senior Asia economist Gareth Leather said a continued decline could have serious implications. “It would act as a drag on demand [and] put further downward pressure on their current accounts,” he said. “This in turn would make their currencies vulnerable to any increase in global risk aversion.”Cambodian authorities’ efforts to diversify the economy, to improve revenue collection and to stabilise the economy and the exchange rate should help improve the country’s credit quality, Moody’s said this week. But in a report that compared Cambodia with the more developed economy of its neighbor Vietnam, the ratings firm said Cambodia faces greater challenges because its economy relies heavily on “garment and textiles production and…other low value-added manufacturing, [which] exposes the economy to sector- and market-specific shocks.” Cambodia’s efforts to modernise, though, are proving effective, the firm added. “Its ongoing reforms to reduce corruption and enhance the rule of law are positive…and the central bank has a track record of delivering economic and exchange rate stability. Argentina’s President Mauricio Macri got an unexpected show of support in a primary election on Sunday, boosting the Argentine peso and local stocks on hopes that his government will push forward with plans to overhaul the country’s economy. The nationwide primary, where voters cast a single ballot for their choice among a raft of candidates from each party, determines which parties are eligible to run for midterm congressional elections in October. Macri’s Let’s Change coalition beat opponents in half of Argentina’s provinces, dealing a setback to former president Cristina Kirchner’s plans for a political comeback. The country’s benchmark Merval index responded with a 6.2% surge this week. Romania’s fast-growing economy doesn’t seem to be helping its currency, the Journal’s Olga Cotaga reports. While the country’s economic growth rate—already the highest in central Eastern Europe—continues to rise, its currency, the leu, has fallen against the euro. The drop could be symptomatic of the quality of Romania’s growth, Rabobank said, noting that the economy is mainly driven by robust domestic demand and less by investment and exports. “If [the] contribution from investments and exports…does not increase sufficiently…the Romanian economy will inevitably run out of steam,” the Dutch bank said. GDP growth climbed to 5.9% in the second quarter from 5.7% in the first.