London — Caster Semenya powered to victory in the 800m final at the World Championships here on Sunday night to take the gold medal ahead of Francine Niyonsaba of Burundi and Ajee Wilson of the US. Semenya, who is the Olympic champion, clocked 1min 55.16sec for a lifetime best. She now has three gold medals at World Championships, following wins at the 2009 and 2011 events. Lebogang Shange battled bravely in the 20km race walk on Sunday, but he was unable to clinch a medal as he got pushed into fourth. Known for his strong finishes, Shange had the consolation of knocking 48sec off his national record as he crossed the line in 1hr 19min 18sec, just 14sec off the podium. That is the first national mark to fall at the showpiece, which ended on Sunday night. Shange was in 20th place at the halfway mark, 25sec behind the leader, and 2km later he attacked. "The plan was to relax, just pass my first 10km in 40:30, but I was still fresh, I passed in 40.13 so I thought I can beat my time, the South African record. "I kept patient and after 12km I kicked. I thought no, I can do it, I can get to the front. I started to believe. … I gave it my best." Shange, picking up just one warning, flew around the 2km lap on London’s famous Mall, and at one stage was 10sec quicker per km than the rest of his rivals. He moved into the lead on the penultimate loop, but he was unable to find that extra gear when Colombian Eider Arevalo, Russian Sergei Shirobokov and Caio Bonfim overhauled him with late kicks. Arevalo won in a 1:18.53, ahead of Shirobokov in 1:18.55 and Bonfim in 1:19.04. "I’m not surprised by my position I worked so hard for it, three months in Europe," said Shange, who failed to finish at the 2013 world championships in Moscow and then ended 11th at the last edition in Beijing two years ago. Shange disappointed at the Rio Olympics, ending 44th in a race where Arevalo finished 15th and Bonfim fourth. "Last year I did too much," Shange said of his pre-Games racing. In 2016 he had six 20km races before the Olympics, and this year he had just four, although he participated in more shorter races. Justin Gatlin agreed with the complaints of the Jamaican relay team that a long wait before their 4x100m final on Saturday contributed to the injury suffered by Usain Bolt in his last race. Bolt, having been passed the baton by Yohan Blake, was in third behind Britain and the US, but pulled up almost 50m from the line. Jamaica’s team doctor later said the 30-year-old had suffered a hamstring cramp. Bolt’s teammates complained that a 45-minute wait before the race had hampered their preparations. "I think they were holding us too long in the call room," Blake told reporters. "Usain was really cold. In fact Usain said to me: ‘Yohan, I think this is crazy’. Forty minutes and two medal presentations before our run." Gatlin, who beat Bolt to gold in the 100m last Saturday, agreed with the complaints and laid the blame at the television scheduling for the event. "I know it’s TV magic, and everybody has to be prepared on time to make everything happen for the viewers. "[But] I think we were held in the stadium a little too long without our clothes on, and there was a little draught in there," Gatlin said. British athletics legend Mo Farah was hailed by the British media on Sunday despite his glorious track career ending with defeat in the 5,000m final. The 34-year-old saw his global championship win streak of 10 gold medals dating back to the 5,000m at the 2011 World Championships ended as Muktar Edris of Ethiopia held off his desperate charge in the finishing straight. "End of the track for Mo" headlined The Sunday Times, adding that it was a "shattering defeat in front of an adoring crowd". However, the paper eulogised about the performance by Farah. "If defeat is the making of a true champion, then Mo Farah left the track at the Olympic stadium last night as the greatest champion of all," wrote its sports writer. Reuters and AFP