SARS has noted the article, "SARS amnesty on hidden assets a flop", by senior editorial staff at Business Day, Hilary Joffe and Linda Ensor. SARS is concerned about the biased reporting approach which creates a negative perception of SARS and its work. The angle of the reporting continues to promote the perception that the revenue service is not performing, not living up to expectation and may not meet its target. As of today (21 August) the number of applications is close to 600. Business Day further reports that the Special Voluntary Disclosure Programme (SVDP) "had so far brought to light hardly more than a 10th of the nearly R40bn hoped for". The "sources" that Business Day relies on must be questioned, because up to date offshore assets to the value of R6.458bn have been revealed. What makes the Business Day narrative even more questionable is the fact that it relates to SVDP applications that were submitted up to July this year. It therefore excludes the values of SVDP applications that are still in the processing pipeline. While Business Day correctly reports that a significant number of taxpayers are making use of the normal VDP programme to report offshore income, it fails to recognise that by making use of the normal VDP it is the investment returns on the offshore assets that are disclosed, and not the value of the offshore assets. Business Day furthermore fails to recognise that the SVDP is a joint project between SARS and the South African Reserve Bank. It also fails to appreciate that the supporting information required by SARS for purposes of the SVDP is minimal. The information that is required by SARS is readily available from offshore financial institutions, which have put additional client service measures in place to assist their clients. For example, in the case of an offshore bank account, SARS requires only five bank statements, being one statement for the month of February for each of the tax periods 2011 until 2015. The reality is that SA is facing a very difficult economic period and during such times a revenue authority must exercise different initiatives to increase and ensure tax compliance to yield the revenue due to the fiscus. It is at a time when the country is at a difficult juncture, that the media too should contribute constructively to the objectives and initiatives that will assist the country on the road to economic recovery. The SVDP window is one such initiative, amongst many. SARS holds the view that Business Day’s headline story on SVDP is irresponsible and premature. In fact, the article or angle of this nature should have reasonably waited until after the deadline and once the common reporting standards kick in, to avoid creating the wrong impression amongst taxpayers being targeted by the SVDP and risk hampering its impact. SARS has embarked on a communications and marketing campaign to ensure widespread awareness of the SVDP and has seen more inquiries as a result. Tax advisers, which clients are largely using to compile their applications, confirm the same. SARS is also aware of applications that are in the process of being finalised due to the daily communication and inquiries between clients and SARS’s SVDP office. The organisation receives inquiries on a daily basis and has established a solid communication line on SVDP matters. Over and above the morality aspect of media reporting, it remains premature to be pre-empting the outcome of the SVDP as SARS will gain a better appreciation of the extent of offshore assets held from September 2017 onwards, then the automatic exchange of information under the Common Reporting Standard commence for early adopters, and in 2018 when automatic exchange of information commences for additional jurisdiction. It must be noted that no amounts were budgeted for in this regard in "Table 4.5 Impact of tax proposals on 2016-17 revenue" in the 2016 Budget Review, as it is difficult to anticipate the final numbers or anticipate the number of declarations that the SVDP will yield. With the influx of SVDP applications anticipated on deadline day, it will take time to process these applications and verify them against information gained via third party financial data under the Common Reporting Standards mechanism. These numbers do not include taxpayers who have elected to use the ongoing Voluntary Disclosure Programme (VDP) to regularise their tax affairs. This is important to note: taxpayers have the option to choose between the normal VDP and the SVDP, depending on which of the two programmes best fits their circumstances. SARS has established that some of the offshore applications are via VDP and others via SVDP, as different conditions are applicable. Thus, when someone makes use of the normal VDP route (which typically occurs when the offshore asset was funded with money that was already taxed in SA), the statistics will only reveal the value of the investment returns, and will not reveal the value of the offshore asset as with the SVDP. In conclusion, the media is a powerful instrument that influences perceptions and sets the agenda in society. Tax compliance and revenue collection are valuable assets that need to be protected at all times. SARS wishes to appeal to media to assist in this regard in a responsible manner and is willing to assist where needed. The work and role of the revenue authority is critical to the country and we would like to work with you to ensure it is accurately reported on. It is important that the inaccurate tone of today’s article kindly be corrected. SARS therefore request that this right of reply and correction to be published in tomorrow’s newspaper. Sandile MemelaExecutive: Media & PR