Las Vegas — Floyd Mayweather and Conor McGregor traded verbal jabs this week as the circus-like countdown to their money-spinning superfight cranked into overdrive on the Las Vegas Strip. Thousands of fans including a sizeable contingent of Irish supporters thronged the heart of the Nevada boxing capital to greet Mayweather and McGregor at their separate grand arrival ceremonies. Mayweather, the 40-year-old undefeated former welterweight boxing champion, has been lured out of retirement to face McGregor, a star of mixed martial arts Ultimate Fighting Championship. The two men meet in a 12-round contest under boxing rules on Saturday that is tipped to become the richest fight in history. The cross-combat collision has appalled boxing purists, with many decrying the event as a farcical publicity stunt more in keeping with the choreographed traditions of WWE wrestling. Mayweather and McGregor — who clashed repeatedly during an expletive-laden world media tour to drum up interest for the fight in July — insist that they are ready to deliver a battle for the ages. McGregor, a huge underdog in what will be his first professional boxing fight, insisted he was ready to stun the odds makers. "This is not even close to my toughest challenge ever. I will crumble him," he roared. "I have adapted perfectly to boxing, I am very pleased and ready. I’m a special man, I will prove that on August 26. This will go one or two rounds, maybe I will bang him out and hurt him. If he survives, I will decide whether I embarrass or seriously hurt him. "I’m calm and cool, same as I am in every fight. I’m fit, sharp and I’m gonna be ruthless in there. I believe he’ll be unconscious inside one round." McGregor and Mayweather passed each other after their separate introductions, with McGregor taunting the American with a shout of, "Why didn’t you want to face off?" — triggering a melee between the two boxers’ entourages. Meanwhile, a relaxed-looking Mayweather had earlier encouraged fans to bet on the fight finishing inside 12 rounds. "I talked to you before and said that this fight wouldn’t go the distance," Mayweather said. "If you’re going to bet, bet it won’t go [the distance]." Mayweather did his best to play down his status as a heavy favourite, insisting that his two-year layoff from the ring had blunted his prowess. "That’s what makes this fight so intriguing, I’ve been out a few years, feel like I’ve lost a few steps," Mayweather said. "So, we’ll just have to wait and see." Mayweather also taunted McGregor over his fitness, telling the US website FightHype that he believed his opponent would struggle to make the 154lb limit for Saturday’s bout. "Conor McGregor is extremely heavy right now," Mayweather said. "I think he’s 164, so he’s still got 10 pounds to go," he added. McGregor hit back at Mayweather’s comments. "He needs to shut his mouth," McGregor said. The sportsman could face a painful financial penalty if he is unable to tip the scales inside the limit. Boxers often have the option of cancelling a fight or collecting a larger share of the purse if an opponent fails to make weight. Some estimates indicate Mayweather could make as much as $200m from Saturday’s contest, with McGregor collecting about $100m. AFP