Singapore — Oil prices edged up on Wednesday on a fall in US crude inventories, although markets were still being weighed down by general oversupply. Brent crude futures were at $51.02 a barrel at 2.18am GMT, up 22c or 0.4% from their last close. US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures were at $47.70 a barrel, up 15c, or 0.3%. US crude inventories fell by 9.2-million barrels in the week to August 11 to 469.2-million, industry group the American Petroleum Institute said on Tuesday. That compared with analyst expectations for a decrease of 3.1-million barrels. "The market took this as a mildly bullish report," said William O’Loughlin, investment analyst at Rivkin Securities. However, petrol stocks climbed by 301,000 barrels, compared with analyst expectations in a Reuters poll for a 1.1-million barrel decline. Official Energy Information Administration (EIA) data will be published late on Wednesday. More broadly, analysts said ample supply was preventing prices from moving much higher. "It is the ongoing fundamental issue of excessive supply that is continuing to weigh on oil prices… Not a lot has changed despite the Opec and Russia efforts recently. While these producers have tried to limit their oil output, US shale oil continues to rise," said Fawad Razaqzada, market analyst at futures brokerage Forex.com. Oil cartel Opec together with non-Opec producers like Russia have pledged to restrict output by 1.8-million barrels a day between January 2017 and March 2018. Offsetting much of that effort, however, US oil production has soared by almost 12% since mid-2016 to 9.42-million barrels a day. On the demand side, analysts also see a gradual slowdown in consumption growth as petrol demand peaks in the US due to improving fuel efficiency and the rise of electric vehicles, while China’s voracious oil thirst also starts to taper off. The crude forward price curve shows that the market condition known as contango, when it is profitable to store oil for later sale and which is seen as an indicator of oversupply, no longer applies. Yet neither is the curve in backwardation, which would make it profitable to sell oil immediately and which is seen as a healthy market for producers. "Opec and Russia still face an uphill battle in reducing the global supply surplus in the face of growth in output elsewhere (US shale oil, Libya, Nigeria) and less than compliant behaviour in their midst (Iraq, United Arab Emirates)," French bank BNP Paribas said in a note. Reuters