Passive investing is gaining ground in SA, mainly due to the (generally) lower fees involved compared with actively managed funds but also based on misperceptions stemming largely from the US experience. Fundamental differences with the local market means that passive investing may not be as successful here as in the US. One of the common misperceptions is that actively managed funds, with higher fees, are not delivering market outperformance to merit those higher fees, nor are they beating passive products on an after-fee basis. However, the truth is that outperformance is cyclical, as with most investments. In the US, the decade of the 2000s was an excellent one for active US equity fund managers, with the median active manager outperforming peer passive funds strongly in eight of the 10 years. More recently, however, the median active US equity fund manager has underperformed the index in six of the past seven years, generating the impression of continually poor active performance. One important difference between the South African and US markets is that exchange traded funds (ETFs) enjoy a substantial tax advantage over actively managed unit trusts in the US. This arbitrage has been one of the key drivers of the US move towards ETF investments. Yet this advantage does not exist in SA, where the two are subject to identical tax treatment. This makes for a less compelling case for local investors to use ETFs compared with the US. Two other significant differences are highlighted in the accompanying graph, showing that the FTSE-JSE Swix Top 40 index is one of the most highly concentrated in the world and has one of the highest turnovers. The first characteristic means that investors who track the index get far less diversification than other broad market equity indices like those in Mexico, Germany and Brazil — or the US, which is the least concentrated. The Swix Top 40 has a concentration (as measured by the Herfindahl-Hirschman index on the vertical axis) of nearly 900, compared with the S&P 500’s Herfindahl-Hirschman index measure at below 100. Naspers, the largest company in SA by market capitalisation, makes up more than 25% of the Swix Top 40 index. Our high market concentration makes simple equity index tracking investments much more risky than in many other countries. At the same time, our Swix Top 40 index has a much higher annual turnover than the US and many other countries, as companies qualify to move in and out of the index more frequently. This drives South African index tracking costs comparatively higher as passive managers must rebalance their portfolio holdings in line with the ever-changing composition of the Top 40, resulting in higher numbers of costly transactions, which detract from performance. Importantly, as shown by the dashed line in the graph, we would expect that the further one moves along a continuum from the US market (lowest concentration, very low index turnover) to SA (highest concentration, very high index turnover), the easier it should be for active managers to outperform the market index. It makes sense that a passive approach could provide better results in highly diversified, lower-cost markets, while an active approach would tend to outperform in less diversified, higher-cost markets. So one could expect that in SA a higher proportion of active managers would be likely to outperform the market index than in the US. An analysis of the performance of Association for Savings and Investment SA (Asisa) equity funds confirms this, showing that a higher percentage of active equity funds succeed in outperforming their benchmarks after fees compared with the US market. Taking the five largest unit trust funds in the Asisa general equity category aggregated with Prudential’s two equity unit trusts as a sample representing 43% of the total assets in the category, 71% of these unit trusts outperformed their own benchmarks after fees over five years to the end of 2016. This rose to 86% outperformance for the five years to June 30 2017. These results should help combat the misperception that active South African equity managers continually underperform their benchmarks. The above findings also demonstrate that active management does add value in the South African market on an after-fee basis. Given the characteristics of our equity market, investors need active management to ensure risk is diversified as much as to generate active returns. • Lambridis is portfolio manager at Prudential Investment Managers.