That possible disciplinary action is pending against MPs critical of President Jacob Zuma, while none is mooted for those linked to the Gupta family, was nothing but "factional", the SACP said on Wednesday. The ANC ally rejected the "witch hunt" against MPs, dismissing it as part of a factionally charged agenda. ANC secretary-general Gwede Mantashe said on Tuesday that disciplinary action would be taken against at least three MPs who were open about their position on last week’s motion of no confidence against President Jacob Zuma. The three most vocal about their stance were Derek Hanekom, Makhosi Khoza and Pravin Gordhan. Hanekom said on Wednesday that he had not been informed of any action yet and had only read about it in the media. He declined to comment further. Khoza and Gordhan could not immediately be reached for comment. Mantashe had said that a discussion would be had with three MPs over their comments before action would be taken. This emerged from the ANC’s national working committee, which is made up largely of Zuma backers. The president and his allies have called for disciplinary action against those who did not toe the party line in the vote. The SACP said "revolutionary discipline" would have seen the ANC acting without fear or favour against corruption. "It would have long ago acted against deployed office bearers, including President Zuma, for making decisions without consultation. Such poorly considered decisions, taken in violation of the democratic, revolutionary discipline of our movement, plunged our country into a financial crisis," the party said. "For example, other ANC officials did acknowledge after the last Cabinet reshuffle that the president acted unilaterally from elsewhere, that is outside our shared revolutionary discipline, Luthuli House and the alliance as a strategic political centre that must guide the conduct of the ANC-led-alliance government." It said the Guptas were smiling "all the way to the bank" due to their relationship with Zuma, while the country had been plunged into recession, the cost of borrowing had shot up and inequality, unemployment and poverty remained high. "All other discipline that turns a blind eye to these glaring realities is nothing but factional discipline!" The SACP reiterated its call for Zuma to step down or for the ANC to recall him.