ANC presidential hopeful Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma and supporters with her were chased away from the Marikana koppie, where 34 mine workers were killed by police in 2012. Dlamini-Zuma and her supporters were at the site of the massacre on Tuesday to lay a wreath when men in Association of Mineworkers and Construction Union (Amcu) T-shirts chased them away, News24 reported. No reason for the action was given. Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, who is also in the running to take over the leadership of the ANC at its December conference, was barred from attending an event last Thursday commemorating the deaths of the mine workers. Ramaphosa apologised earlier in 2017 for an e-mail he had sent shortly before the Marikana bloodbath, saying his language in the e-mail might have been unfortunate and inappropriate. Meanwhile, the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid) handed over to the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) on Tuesday the dockets of its investigation into the shooting of the 34 mine workers. The 34 were shot dead on August 16 2012 after a violent protest during a strike by the workers over pay increases. Ipid national spokesman Moses Dlamini confirmed that the dockets had been sent to the NPA on Tuesday. NPA spokesman Luvuyo Mfaku said prosecutors would peruse the dockets and decide whether there were outstanding investigations to be pursued or not. If there were still issues outstanding, the dockets relating to the killings would be sent back to Ipid, Mfaku said. The Ipid investigators dealing with the matter had said they would be on leave for three weeks, he said. The dockets had earlier been sent back to Ipid for further investigation. The five-member prosecutorial team dealing with the matter is headed by Torie Pretorius, acting special director of the priority crimes litigation unit. A total of 47 people were killed during the protests five years ago, including four security guards and two policemen. Responding to the news of the dockets being handed over, Socio-Economic Rights Institute director of litigation Nomzamo Zondo said anything that happened in the matter was progress. The institute represents the families of the workers killed at Marikana. Zondo said the families had not heard anything from Ipid and the NPA on the matter. It was unusual in a criminal matter that victims or their families were not kept informed of developments in a case. "That is what the police do on a daily basis. The families haven’t heard that." The families of the slain mine workers could not continue with private prosecutions until the NPA had refused to prosecute, she said. The families had to at least be informed of developments in the case. It was unclear how many police officers involved in the shooting were investigated by Ipid, Zondo said. The Socio-Economic Rights Institute would ask Ipid to tell the families what it had handed over to the NPA, she said. mailovichc@businesslive.co.za