London — Shares rose on Tuesday, while the yen, Swiss franc and gold all dropped after North Korea’s leader signalled he would delay plans to fire a missile towards Guam, easing tension and prompting investors to buy riskier assets. European shares followed Asian bourses higher, having already risen late on Monday after US officials played down prospects of the standoff between North Korea and the US leading to conflict. The pan-European Stoxx 600 index rose 0.1%, adding to Monday’s 1.1% gains. North Korea’s leader Kim Jong-un received a report from his army on its plans to fire missiles towards the US Pacific territory of Guam and said he would watch the actions of the US for a while longer before making a decision, the North’s official news agency said on Tuesday. "There is a more relaxed attitude being taken towards the Korean situation in markets. With the report North Korea has put its plans on hold, there is a sense of stepping back from the brink," Rabobank analyst Lyn Graham-Taylor said. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan was 0.1% higher in afternoon trade, with Australia up 0.5%. South Korea’s markets were closed for a holiday. Japan’s Nikkei stock index closed up 1.1%, boosted by the weaker yen, a day after skidding 1% to its lowest since early May. US stocks futures were higher, indicating Wall Street would open higher later in the day. On Monday the S&P 500 rose 1.0%, led by technology stocks, in its biggest daily percentage rise since April. Assets that generally do well in time of market or geopolitical turbulence were among losers on Tuesday. The yen, which tends to gain on the expectation Japanese investors will repatriate assets in a crisis, fell 0.6% to ¥110.32 per dollar. "We have North Korea saying they will wait, and Trump not saying anything at all, compared to his past promise of ‘fire and fury’," said Mitsuo Imaizumi, chief forex strategist at Daiwa Securities. "That added up to good news for the dollar, bad news for the yen," he said. The Swiss franc, which gained 1.1% on August 9 as the war of words over the Korean peninsula intensified, fell 0.2% to Sf0.9736 per dollar. This followed a 1.1% fall on Monday. The euro was down 0.4% at $1.1733, helping push the dollar index, which measures the greenback against a basket of currencies, up 0.4%. The dollar was also helped by comments from New York Federal Reserve president William Dudley, who told the Associated Press he would favour a third increase in Fed interest rates in 2017 if the economy developed as he expected. In debt markets, yields on low-risk German and US government bonds rose. German 10-year yields, the benchmark for eurozone borrowing costs, rose 1.7 basis points to 0.42%, having fallen to as low as 0.38% on Friday. US 10-year treasury yields rose three basis points to 2.47%, up from a six-week low of 2.18% touched on Friday. Gold, viewed as a safe haven for investors in troubled times, fell 0.6% to $1,274/oz. Oil prices steadied somewhat after falling more than 2.5% on Monday to its lowest in about three weeks on the strength of the dollar and reduced refining in China. Brent crude, the international benchmark, was last down 2c at $50.71 a barrel. Reuters