Jeremy Brockie will be the centre of attention when his club, SuperSport United, host Mamelodi Sundowns in a Tshwane derby at Lucas Moripe Stadium in Atteridgeville on Saturday. Brockie is the subject of a transfer tug of war between United and Sundowns‚ who have been flirting with the New Zealander since the pre-season transfer window opened a few weeks ago. United have rejected an initial bid reportedly worth over R10m, but the Brazilians have not given up hope of signing the hitman before the transfer deadline at the end of August. "It is not me who will have to give in if Sundowns keep pushing for a transfer‚ it is between SuperSport and Sundowns‚" Brockie said on Thursday. "I have spoken to [United CE] Stan Matthews and he has made it pretty firm that they are not going to sell me because I am an important part of the club. "I am an ambitious player‚ I like challenges and that is the reason I came to SA. "I can’t say too much more than that because I am under contract with SuperSport and it still has two years left. That’s where it stands at the moment. "SuperSport are saying they want to give me a new deal‚ so we will see how that develops." United coach Eric Tinkler weighed in on the matter. "He is going nowhere‚" Tinkler said. "Jeremy is the type of player that when given the right supply and in the right areas‚ he has the ability to score." The premiership season gets under way when champions Bidvest Wits host Cape Town City on Friday night. And Wits will be hoping their first league match ends better than that of the champions of preceding seasons. But if the trend is to be kept up, then Wits look likely to drop points at home against City. A draw is the most likely outcome‚ according to the statistics. The last three champions have been held to a draw in their first match in defence of their title. But overall, the statistics do point to a positive start for the reigning champs. Since the Premier Soccer League was launched 21 years ago‚ the defending champions have won 10 out of 20 times in their first match of the season following their title success for a win percentage of 50%. There have been six draws and four losses. The last club to lose in the first match after a winning season was SuperSport United in 2011, when Gavin Hunt was still their coach. United were beaten 3-0 by Wits. In 2016, incumbent title holders Mamelodi Sundowns started their league season with a goalless draw against Maritzburg United.