Bafana Bafana coach Stuart Baxter says he needs soldiers to go to battle against Cape Verde in crucial back-to-back 2018 World Cup qualifiers in September and it was these fighting qualities that motivated the recall of veteran Morgan Gould to the national team after a four-year absence. The 34-year-old Gould last played for Bafana in a 2-0 win over Central African Republic in a World Cup qualifier in March 2013 and his inclusion was the only surprise in Baxter’s squad. "If we get an injury we’re not thinking about development‚ we’re thinking about someone who has to go in with the experience and being in good enough form to carry the colours on their shoulders and not capitulating‚" Baxter said. "So with all due respect to some of the younger players‚ Morgan has been outstanding in the PSL this time. ‘‘I’ve coached him at SuperSport‚ I know his physical status now and he is probably better now than he was when I was at Kaizer Chiefs with him. ‘‘And so I’ve got absolutely no doubt at all that selecting Morgan is not a cry to bring back the old guard. ‘‘We have a soldier here who will go to battle for SA in these two World Cup qualifiers. ‘‘We are not talking in six months time‚ 10 months time or in five years’ time‚ we’re talking here and now. "Morgan Gould is very well equipped to do that‚ plus his experience in the dressing room of big occasions will be a massive help." Bafana are second in World Cup qualifying Group D after two matches and are level on points (four) with Burkina Faso‚ who lead on goal difference. The South Africans will face Cape Verde on September 1 in Praia then host them four days later in Durban. Baxter conceded he was taking a bit of a risk in the goalkeeping department as Bafana No1 Itumeleng Khune had not played for Kaizer Chiefs on Sunday because of a chest infection. Khune’s potential replacement Darren Keet had not played for Wits at the weekend because of a niggling injury, but both players are in the squad. Baxter said while he expected both players to recover‚ he did have a Plan B in case they failed to do so. Bafana will assemble in Johannesburg on Sunday and depart for Cape Verde on Tuesday.