Parliament has stressed that the way in which the motion of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma was conducted was secure and "beyond reproach". Parliament’s a statement on Wednesday morning follows statements from factions within the ANC that ANC MPs who "voted with the opposition" should be pursued and punished. Zuma was not removed in last week’s motion but a record number of ANC MPs voted against their leader. The ANC’s official line, according to secretary-general Gwede Mantashe, is that MPs who openly criticised Zuma, declaring that they would "vote with their conscience" and not along party lines, ought to be disciplined. However, ANC Youth League president Collen Maine has gone as far as to suggested that all ANC MPs be subjected to lie detector tests to ascertain how they voted in the secret ballot — the confidentiality of which was reaffirmed by the Constitutional Court. Factions supporting Zuma have been baying for the blood of MPs including Pravin Gordhan, Derek Hanekom, Makhosi Khoza and Mondli Gungubele. Zuma has supported these calls, at least tacitly, by failing to condemn the brazen efforts to flout the spirit of the Constitutional Court’s judgment on the matter. Parliament said the legislature took all necessary measures to ensure the secret ballot protected the details of how each member voted. "Parliament wishes to reaffirm that all the necessary measures were put in place to ensure that the integrity of the secret ballot is not compromised, thereby making the identity of the voter impossible to trace," the statement said. No devices were allowed in the voting booths and those carrying zoom-lens cameras were requested to leave the gallery, it said. Chamber broadcast camera controllers were ordered not to focus on voting booths. "The ballot boxes were then stored in archive boxes under lock and key and may only be opened by order of the National Assembly Speaker or a court of law. "The rigorous confidentiality measures regarding the motion of no confidence were endorsed by all parties and are similar to those employed in the election of the president and presiding officers since 1994," the statement said.