Radioactive sand from mine dumps is frequently collected, sold and used in cement for houses in Soweto, according to a new Bench Marks Foundation report, Waiting to Inhale, released on Tuesday. With dust blowing off mine dumps, tainted water and asbestos roofs, the sand appears to be contributing to abnormally high levels of respiratory diseases, birth deformities and skin and eye ailments in four communities studied. Aided by Lawyers for Human Rights, the communities are preparing to take legal action against the mines and the government. Rose Plaatjies, who has lived in the Riverlea community all her life, said she was on oxygen therapy 16 hours a day. "The [toxic] dust is a truth.... My lungs can’t help me to breathe any more. Our children have eczema and eye problems and they are being born small. "The government put us here and gave us an asbestos roof, but no one told us anything [about the hazards]," she said. The three-year study, financed largely by Christian Aid of the UK, was conducted among residents of four Soweto suburbs: Riverlea, Doornkop in Snake Park, Diepkloof and Meadowlands. The study found more than half of residents in each area said coughs, sinusitis, asthma and tuberculosis were their most persistent ailments. All four suburbs are close to mine dumps. In some, such as Riverlea, 97% of the houses still have asbestos roofs, although asbestos roofing was banned in 2008. Among other possible variables, the researchers found rates of smoking were similar across suburbs. Most houses have had electricity for so long that burning coal, paraffin or wood was not a factor. The suburbs were compared with Danville in Mafikeng, where there is no mining nearby, but where 52.6% of houses have asbestos roofs. In Danville, rates of respiratory disease were half that of Riverlea. David van Wyk, Bench Marks’s lead researcher, said the study showed mining activity played a higher role in respiratory ailments in these areas than asbestos roofs or smoking. The organisation urged the Department of Health to conduct an epidemiological study on the effects of mining on communities’ health. Among mining’s many other effects, children in Soweto are exposed to toxic acid mine drainage in many unfenced pools and dams. Bench Marks urged the government to tackle acid mine drainage and improve access to information about it. mathewsc@businesslive.co.za