Any push-back by the ANC against Black First Land First’s (BLF) attack on the media may be too late and could worsen attacks on journalists and those seeking to lift the lid on corruption, the executive director in the Press Council of SA Joe Thloloe warned on Thursday. Thloloe was speaking at the Daily Maverick Nando’s event, The Gathering. The event’s theme was the Gupta e-mails and media’s role in South African society. As Thloloe spoke, members of BLF, including its president, Andile Mngxitama, left the event’s entrance after an unsuccessful attempt to enter for a panel discussion on "press freedom and regulation". The ANC recently condemned the BLF’s attack on journalists, including Tiso Blackstar editor-at large Peter Bruce and Business Day editor Tim Cohen. However, Thloloe warned that this condemnation would only embolden the group in its "fringe tactics" against journalists and Gupta critics. "The ANC has turned against the BLF for attacking journalists and they point to the Constitution in doing so. But the truth is that the ANC is inadvertently encouraging the BLF in its anti-democratic posture and very soon journalists will not be free to do their work in the country, in spite of a Constitution which protects them," said Thloloe. While the ANC did speak up for media freedom when the party condemned BLF, the relationship between the party and the media has long been tense with the ANC punting strict press regulation. Thloloe said he did not consider the establishment of a media tribunal a strong likelihood, but said while this was being discussed, various other freedoms in SA could be whittled away. "The threat of a media tribunal does not worry me. The Constitutional Court will rule against it. However, by the time it gets there, public funds would have been wasted and years would have been lost." Thloloe disputed the ANC’s assertion that South Africans did not trust existing mechanisms aimed at maintaining the highest journalistic standards from media houses and reporters. "Up to 536 people used our system this year and this has come slightly down from 591 complaints last year. SA still sees us as a useful mechanism. We believe we contribute to press freedom in this country by assuring the government does not sink its claws into the country."