Johannesburg’s finances remain a sticky issue for Herman Mashaba, a year after his election as mayor. Mashaba is fighting allegations by the opposition ANC that the city he is running is on the verge of bankruptcy. It is believed that the leader of the ANC in Johannesburg, Parks Tau, met Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba last week to raise his party’s concern about the city’s finances. The ANC said that Mashaba had "brought the City of Johannesburg to economic and financial ruin". Tau repeated earlier claims that the city was close to bankruptcy, an allegation that the city council and Mashaba have denied. He said the ANC had raised issues such as an inflated budget for 2017-18 and the cash and liquidity position in the city. The ANC also warned that a skills gap was looming in the city, alleging that 27 executives out of 35 had been purged over the past 12 months. Mashaba, who spent his first anniversary in office in Kliptown on Tuesday, said the ANC’s allegations were laughable. On Tuesday, he launched the electrification of "the forgotten" Extension 11, and gave feedback on the coalition’s achievements over the past year. His main success, he said, was in the city’s fight against corruption, during which 314 people were arrested. A total of 2,714 title deeds had been handed over to residents. Tau lost the mayoral seat after the ANC was unable to hold on to its majority in the metro, following the August 2016 municipal elections. "Unfortunately, some people who have failed to be [in] government are now failing as opposition," Mashaba said. The ANC was misleading communities on the city’s finances, he said. "The City of Johannesburg is able to meet its financial commitments and it will continue to meet [them]," Mashaba said. There would be a large improvement in revenue collection over the next five years, Mashaba said. One of the biggest issues the city faces is a billing crisis, of which the mayor has personally taken control recently. Khume Ramulifho, the DA’s Johannesburg regional chairman, said it was saddening that the ANC would hold a media briefing about the current administration, when it had run the city "in an environment of chaos, disorder, poor service delivery and corruption". mailovichc@businesslive.co.za