London — Oil prices steadied on Tuesday after a heavy sell-off following a surge in the dollar, and weighed down by signs of weaker demand in China, the world’s second-largest consumer. Benchmark Brent crude was unchanged at $50.73 a barrel by 8.30am GMT. US light crude was 5c lower at $47.54. Chinese oil refineries operated in July at their slowest daily rates since September, official data showed. The drop was steeper than expected, raising concerns over the state of Chinese demand and level of domestic stocks. Ample supply from big oil exporters, including members of the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec) and the US also encouraged investors to sell long positions bought in July during a period of rising prices, analysts said. Brent and US crude both reached two-month highs in early August but have fallen gradually in the last few days, with falls accelerating on Monday. "The focus remains on Opec, US inventories and disappointing Chinese demand," said Hans van Cleef, senior energy economist at Dutch bank ABN AMRO in Amsterdam. "Those concerns have triggered profit taking after a strong run-up in July." The dollar rallied on Tuesday on an easing of the tension over North Korea. A stronger dollar tends to limit demand for oil for buyers paying in other currencies. The dollar index, which measures its strength against a basket of six major currencies, climbed 0.4% on Monday and was up 0.3% on Tuesday. An announcement by the Nigerian subsidiary of Royal Dutch Shell that it had lifted a force majeure on Bonny Light crude exports also added to the market surplus. US crude stockpiles likely fell for a seventh consecutive week, along with a probable fall in distillate and gasoline inventories, a preliminary Reuters poll showed. The weekly US crude inventory report from industry group the American Petroleum Institute was due to be published later on Tuesday. Official US government statistics will be released on Wednesday. Efforts by Opec and other producers to limit output have helped lift Brent past $50 a barrel, but production elsewhere, particularly in the US, has undermined prices. US shale oil production is expected to grow for a ninth consecutive month in September to 6.15-million barrels a day, the US Energy Information Administration said on Monday. Reuters