Salta — The Springboks scored five tries to thump Argentina 41-23 in the Rugby Championship on Saturday, punishing the indiscipline that cost the Pumas a red card for lock Tomas Lavanini. The victory, the Springboks’ first away after four home wins, lifted SA level with title holders New Zealand on nine points apiece after two rounds. SA top the log on points difference — SA are +40 and New Zealand +26 — Australia have one point and Argentina none. It was the first away victory since Allister Coetzee succeeded Heyneke Meyer as SA coach at the beginning of last season, ending six consecutive defeats on the road. Coetzee said planning and conditioning were key factors in taming the Pumas. "We changed our travel plan to Salta this year, preparing for two days in SA before flying to Argentina on Wednesday, which is our rest day," he explained. All that was left for the Springboks to do when they arrived in Salta less than two days before the match was light training, he said. "I think a key to winning in Salta was leadership — the way our players showed calmness and character under pressure," Coetzee added. Flanker Siya Kolisi ran in two tries, with flyhalf Elton Jantjies and replacement forward Jean-Luc du Preez scoring the others. The Springboks were also awarded a penalty try. Jantjies kicked 14 points for a personal tally of 19. Wingers Ramiro Moyano and Matias Moroni scored tries for the Pumas, who lost Lavanini and Juan Manuel Leguizamon to the sin bin and had Lavanini sent off for a deliberate knockdown, his second yellow card offence, 23 minutes from the end. Argentina led for 20 minutes after an early penalty by Emiliano Boffelli and despite losing Lavanini to his first yellow card for a shoulder charge. In the 20th minute, Jantjies chipped over the Argentine defence, flanker Jesse Kriel picked up and passed to Kolisi, who went over under the posts. Jantjies, who missed two early penalties, converted and added a penalty but Argentina hit back from the restart. The South Africans allowed flyhalf Hernandez’s high kick to bounce and Moyano nipped in to steal the ball and charge over with the veteran No10 converting to level the scores. The Springboks changed ends 17-10 ahead after a Jantjies try following Leguizamon’s yellow card for repeated infringements. The home side made a good start to the second half, closing the gap with a Hernandez penalty, and looked poised to go over the South African line, only for the visitors to steal the ball and break upfield with Kolisi scoring his second try. Tempers flared when SA looked set to go over again and Lavanini stretched to knock down the ball. He and Leguizamon were involved in fighting with rival players before SA were awarded the penalty try. Argentina’s game seemed to have completely unravelled, yet their 14 men fought back, Moroni going over after a breakaway down the right. Springboks fullback Andries Coetzee was sin-binned for bundling him into advertising boards. A second Boffelli penalty from halfway lifted Argentina within eight points and 20 minutes still to play, but late South African pressure delivered 10 more points. Reuters and AFP