Sydney — Michael Cheika is looking for an attitude change rather than a personnel overhaul ahead of the return Test against New Zealand, but it is hard to imagine the Wallabies coach naming the same side on Thursday after the Sydney humiliation. Australian rugby, already reeling after a miserable Super Rugby season and the chaos surrounding the cull of the Western Force, hit a new nadir when the All Blacks racked up 54 points in the opening 48 minutes of last Saturday’s Test. With the World Cup in Japan a little more than two years away, though, the temptation for Cheika to stick to his selectorial guns for Saturday’s match in Dunedin must be strong even after the crushing 54-34 defeat. After changing his line-up for almost every match and doling out 20 first caps since the 2015 World Cup final, Cheika knows he needs to start giving his combinations some time to bed in before 2019. The defensive chaos in Sydney is sure to result in some tweaks in the backline, but otherwise Cheika risks a second humiliation that might even start to threaten his own position. Dane Haylett-Petty would probably have started last weekend had he not still been recovering from a biceps problem and he will almost certainly come in for Curtis Rona on the left wing. A midfield that resembled a revolving door for the All Blacks at times in the Rugby Championship opener is also likely to be altered, with Tevita Kuridrani coming in for Samu Kerevi at outside centre, as he did in Sydney. Kurtley Beale’s attacking threat should save him from the chop, but it would be wishful thinking to believe the All Blacks will not be targeting the inside centre and Bernard Foley at flyhalf. The back row is another area where Cheika might make changes with blindside flanker Ned Hanigan all but disappearing amid Saturday’s carnage. Lopeti Timani is only marginally more experienced but would bring a little more heft to the back row and, if played at No8, allow Cheika to retain the energy of Sean McMahon in the No6 shirt. Western Force must wait to find out whether they have a future in Super Rugby after the judge hearing an appeal against their axing reserved his decision on Wednesday. Justice David Hammerschlag, at the Supreme Court of New South Wales in Sydney, said he would endeavour to provide a decision as soon as next week but was "not confident" of doing so, the Australian Rugby Union (ARU) said. The ARU announced its decision to cut the Perth team from Super Rugby recently after arbitration with the Force found in favour of the governing body. Reuters