Bafana Bafana coach Stuart Baxter has cautioned against complacency heading into Friday’s 2018 World Cup qualifier against Cape Verde. Cape Verde are viewed as the whipping boys in Group D — they are yet to win a game in the qualifiers — but Baxter said Bafana could not afford to underestimate their hosts, who are ranked 114th. ‘‘My father said to me: ‘Always beware the man that has nothing to lose’. So, they have got nothing to lose‚" Baxter said on Monday. "We have to go there with the same attitude. They can play the way they want. "If we play well … we have a chance of getting a good result. So, we’ve got to make sure that our mentality is tight. "We want to be a team‚ we want to make sure that everybody puts in 100%. ‘‘We want to be able to express ourselves in the right way‚ have that feeling of no regrets and no anxiety." Baxter has had to deal with injuries to key personnel. He revealed that midfielder Thulani Serero was nursing a hamstring injury. Serero‚ who was not selected for Dutch side Vitesse Arnhem at the weekend after pulling up with the injury last week, sat in the stands and will have to be assessed by the Bafana medical staff regarding his availability for Friday’s match. SuperSport United’s Clayton Daniels has been called up to replace the injured Rivaldo Coetzee. Explaining the thinking behind the selection of Daniels‚ Baxter said he needed someone who could hit the ground running as he did not have the luxury of experimenting. The two worked together at United and Baxter said he knew exactly what Daniels would bring to the table. Bafana are second in World Cup qualifying group D after two matches‚ level on four points with Burkina Faso‚ who only lead on goal difference. Bafana will leave for Cape Verde on Tuesday. Meanwhile, the past weekend was not a great one for Bafana’s overseas-based footballers. Striker Tokelo Rantie picked up a straight red card for Turkish outfit Genclerbirligi‚ the first sending off of his career and just his second booking of any kind in almost four years. Rantie was punished for a swinging elbow into the face of Fenerbahce defender Hasan Kaldirim. Bongani Zungu did not make it off the bench for Portuguese side Vitoria Guimaraes, as his difficult start to the new campaign continued. Andile Jali played for 83 minutes as his Belgian side KV Oostende suffered a fifth consecutive league defeat this season, when they went down 4-3 to Antwerp. It has been a horror start to the campaign for them. Striker Kermit Erasmus was again left out of the match-day squad by French Ligue 1 side Stade Rennes and has not played a single minute this season. His most recent competitive football was on loan at Lens at the end of last season, on May19. Whether that has had an effect on his sharpness in front of goal remains to be seen. Keagan Dolly did make his first start of the campaign when he played 76 minutes for French side Montpellier as they lost 2-1 at Dijon. Kamohelo Mokotjo played 65 minutes for English Championship side Brentford as they were held to a 0-0 draw at home by Wolves. TimesLIVE