Bell Equipment’s share price surged 23.38% to close at R9.50 on Monday after it said it expected headline earnings per share to be at least 70% higher in the six months to June 2017 from the matching period in 2016. The maker of heavy vehicles used in agriculture, forestry, waste handling, construction and mining, said the expected increase was due mainly to a rise in demand — especially in South African markets — and the recovery of a substantial customer account that had been provided for in the earlier period. The financial results of a subsidiary in the Democratic Republic of Congo also improved in the interim period, after losses in the matching period in 2016, due to fraud and mismanagement. "Bell is a difficult [company] to analyse," Ron Klipin, a Cratos Wealth portfolio manager, said on Monday. "The company has been downsizing and rightsizing for a number of years." Mainly this had been due to the sharp downturn in minerals commodities until recently, Klipin said. This had a negative effect on demand for heavy "yellow metal" machinery of the kind made by Bell. The expected positive 47c per share jump in earnings comes as Nedbank on Monday said mining production in SA fell 0.8% year on year in June, from a 4.1% increase in May, mainly on a decline in platinum group metals production. "Mining activity will rebound, albeit moderately, from the low base in 2016." the bank said on Monday. "However, longer-term prospects remain less certain due to the difficult operating environment and policy uncertainty stemming mostly from business-unfriendly decisions made by the minister of mineral resources," it said. SA’s economy had sunk into recession, but had been supported from further decline by a rise in global mining commodities prices and the recovery of much of the domestic agricultural sector after prolonged drought. Klipin said that some of Bell’s operations had been moved from Richards Bay in KwaZulu-Natal for assembly at the group’s German facilities to service non-African markets, especially the US, previously served through an arrangement with American multinational John Deere. "This should be a positive move as Bell has its own distribution channels enabling higher margins. "It is too early to call a turnaround, however once the full results are released, we should be able to better evaluate prospects," Klipin said. allixm@bdfm.co.za