Wales and British & Irish Lions centre Jonathan Davies believes the addition of two South African teams to the PRO14 will be a boost for the tournament and an inspiration for northern hemisphere sides with the prospect of a new challenge. The Southern Kings and Cheetahs have been included in the expanded tournament‚ which features top clubs from Wales‚ Ireland‚ Italy and Scotland. It starts on September 1. Davies‚ named Lions’ player of the tour after the drawn series against the All Blacks‚ plays for defending PRO14 champions the Scarlets who host the Kings in their opening game in Llanelli on September 2. "I don’t know a lot about the Southern Kings but I do know they had some good results in Super Rugby‚" Davies admitted. "Going to Sydney and beating the Waratahs was a great result. "They play a counterattacking style and I’m sure our analysts … will be doing a lot of work right now‚ to make sure we have a good look at them. "You want to test yourself‚ so the way the likes of the Southern Kings and Cheetahs play in Super Rugby might be different to how we have played in the PRO14 previously. "There is an element of the unknown and first up they might shock us. "But it’s something that excites you as a player and makes sure you prepare well and give them the right respect without doubting yourself. "Playing against a South African team that wants to prove itself is a great way for the Scarlets to start the new season because as defending champions we also have a point to prove." On the recent Lions tour‚ Davies had a first-hand look at New Zealand Super Rugby teams and was impressed. Obviously the Cheetahs and Kings are not at the same level as the Crusaders and Hurricanes‚ but Davies does not expect it will be easy. "Having played against New Zealand provincial sides my impression was every game was almost at Test match intensity‚" Davies said. "That’s what you want — to test yourself at the highest level — and to have two South African teams in PRO14‚ who have been exposed to New Zealand’s level of rugby for a number of years‚ can only be a positive. "I do consider playing against South African teams at provincial level as a good measure of our standards because internationally any Test against the Springboks is tough. "After a Test you feel you’ve had a game and to have that kind of physical confrontation in a league structure will be great for us. South African players are very proud of their rugby and so are we in the northern hemisphere," Davies said. "I had a tour of the Springbok Experience Museum and it gave me another reminder of how much rugby means to South Africans. It’s just like in Wales. "Hopefully we can show a new audience the strength of our rugby." TimesLIVE