While it is well established that one of the purposes of broad-based black economic empowerment (BBBEE) is to address historical imbalances or patterns of past discrimination in SA, the fact that it is based on a flawed race-based categorisation from the apartheid era means there will always be challenges in applying it. This is all too evident in determining who is "coloured" for the purposes of BBBEE, where there is still confusion among rating agents and practitioners. This confusion leads to discriminatory practices that unfairly prejudice South Africans of colour. The process of determining who is coloured will presumably become more challenging as SA becomes further ethnically integrated (with more children born of mixed parentage) and more globalised. For example, there is reportedly a view among some BBBEE rating agents and practitioners that a South African citizen born after 1994 who has an African or coloured father and white mother should be classified for BBBEE purposes as coloured, whereas if they had a white father and an African or coloured mother they should be classified as white. Some have reportedly even taken the alarming view that children with a white father and African or coloured mother, should be classified as white unless they look more coloured than white. This confusion has presumably arisen because the racial classifications that were created under apartheid are still referenced in BBBEE legislation. The term "black people" is defined in BBBEE legislation as "a generic term which means Africans, Coloureds and Indians (a) who are citizens of the Republic of SA by birth or descent; or (b) who became citizens of the Republic of SA by naturalisation i. before April 27 1994 or ii. on or after April 27 1994 and who would have been entitled to acquire citizenship by naturalisation prior to that date". However, it does not define the terms "African", "coloured" or "Indian". The legal classification as coloured originates from the apartheid-era Population Registration Act, which included anyone whose parents were designated as coloured or who had one parent designated as white and one parent who was designated as African or coloured. In applying the Population Registration Act, vague factors such as appearance, habits, mode of life and "general acceptance" by a particular ethnic group were also taken into account. In other words, it was never completely clear how the classification should be applied in the first place, and attempts to apply it at the time resulted in tests that were absurd, inhuman and degrading. Similarly, the current practice by BBBEE rating agents and practitioners clearly discriminates against African and coloured mothers on the grounds of their sex, which is prohibited under the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act. Under this interpretation, African or coloured men are free to have children with whomever they choose without fear that their offspring will lose their preferential BBBEE status. African and coloured women are penalised if they have children with white men by depriving their children of preferential BBBEE status. There is no apparent justifiable reason for discriminating against African or coloured women and their children in this way. If anything, the rights of African and coloured women have been identified as being particularly vulnerable and, in some instances, they have been awarded greater recognition than African and coloured men. The practice may also discriminate against the relevant children on other grounds that are listed in the act, such as race, birth, ethnic or social origin or colour. The inadequacy of the definition of a "black person" was successfully challenged by the Chinese Association of SA in June 2008, when it won a victory in the high court to extend the definition of black people to include South Africans of Chinese origin (who were classified as coloured under apartheid) despite initially facing opposition from various government ministries and professional organisations. While a system based on racial classifications is unavoidable in the BBBEE context, a clearer definition of who is coloured and, consequently, entitled to the benefits of BBBEE would at least help to minimise (if not eliminate) some of these alarming practices. • Cunard is a director at Werksmans Attorneys.