Italtile says trading conditions and consumer sentiment continued to deteriorate over the year to June 2017 as a result of poor economic growth in SA amid political uncertainty. The franchisor and retailer of locally made and imported tiles, sanitaryware, bathware and flooring says this has caused an industry-wide fall in sales, as price competition and margin pressure has intensified. In this “adverse environment” homeowners have curtailed or deferred discretionary spend on improvements and renovations. Meanwhile, the new-build segment had fallen further, with a marked decrease in building plans passed. “In the light of a very difficult market, Italtile produced credible results given siren warnings issued by Cashbuild [nominally a competitor firm] six months ago,” said Vunani Securities small and medium market cap analyst Anthony Clark. He said a slowdown in the sector after years of good growth showed that consumers — including those in rural areas who had helped drive a lengthy boom in home improvements — were now feeling pressure. But he also said the company was on the right track. It had tightened costs and vertically integrated operations to “trap more margin”. Importantly, it had hoarded cash and reduced inventory. “So, it is in an incredibly strong position to ride this [slump] out,” Clark said. Italtile CEO Jan Potgieter said management was “disappointed” with the company’s performance in the second half of the year. Sales and profitability had failed to meet management’s targets. In general, large segments of the market remained overstocked due to the downturn in demand and the high level of imports. Potgieter said the outlook for the economy was unlikely to improve in the next six months, but the company was “confident in its business model” and would roll out 20 new stores in the new financial year. Italtile, which holds a 21% strategic stake in tiles, sanitaryware and bathware manufacturer Ceramic Industries, wants to buy up 100% of the company. Following the prohibition of the acquisition by the Competition Commission, Itatile is waiting for a final Competition Tribunal ruling on Friday. “This issue has dragged on and on and has frustrated management. The deal — if consummated — will be great for Italtile, as the strategy to make, distribute wholesale and retail is a smart move,” Clark said. Potgieter said Italtile’s counsel believed the group had a good case for the proposed buyout and the tribunal’s ruling would be in the company’s favour, with some conditions. allixm@bdfm.co.za 