Participating in the Barclays PLC sale of more than one-third of South African-listed Barclays Africa Group (BGA) catapulted the latter into a top 10 share across most of Allan Gray’s client mandates, almost overnight. Simon Raubenheimer, portfolio manager at Allan Gray, discusses the investment case. Earlier this quarter, Allan Gray clients had the chance to participate in a rare opportunity: on May 31 2017, UK-based Barclays PLC announced the sale of 33.7% of Barclays Africa Group (BGA) for R37.7-billion. The placement price of R132 per share was at an almost 10% discount to the closing share price on the day before the announcement and the average price over the preceding month. At short notice our clients got to invest a substantial sum of money in a decent asset at a great price. The lion’s share of Barclays’ investment in what was then called Absa was made in 2005 at R82.50 (or £8 per share from their perspective). A further investment was made in 2013 (share price £9.50), coinciding with a name change to BGA. By March 2016, Barclays – now under a new CEO – reversed course and announced its intention to sell the bulk of its 62.3% in BGA. A chunk was sold off in May 2016 at £5.80/share, and the recent sale at £7.80 will leave Barclays with about 15% of BGA (soon to be called Absa?). From Barclays’ perspective, its investment in BGA has been disappointing: Our major banks have all grown their earnings faster than the market over the long term, and the banking sector overall has done well for all stakeholders. We are not oblivious to the challenging economic climate facing the banking sector. Weak economic growth and political instability are legitimate concerns. Rating downgrades carry economic consequences through higher capital costs and lower returns on equity for the banks. However, these concerns are well known and widely publicised. Importantly, however, the fundamentals underpinning the South African banking system have not changed. It is vital not to lose sight of the long-term picture amid all the noise and hysteria. Our banking sector remains a small, conservative and tightly regulated industry operating in a largely closed currency system. The following factors suggest current banking industry profits are not high: BGA’s earnings growth has lagged its competitors by a few percentage points every year over the past five years. With hindsight, the bank made a few strategic errors: credit was tightened too aggressively after the global financial crisis, and the product offering became too expensive and lagged its peers in terms of digital functionality. Clients who wanted personal and home loans simply moved their accounts elsewhere. BGA’s challenge now is to stem the tide and reignite growth in its top line. The bank has a big market share in critical areas but is losing ground to competitors. Tough times can have a silver lining if they give us the opportunity to buy assets at bargain prices. This might classify as one such opportunity: our recent investment in BGA was at a multiple of 7.5 times its most recent earnings and a dividend yield of 7.8%. It is not every day that one sees dividend yields higher than price/earnings ratios on the JSE, as shown in the graph below. Absa’s p/e ratio has been lower than its dividend yield on only three occasions in the history we have for the bank (or for its predecessor, United Bank, given that Absa was only established in 1991) – 1988, 1994 and 2008. All those times were characterised by massive uncertainty and investor distress. And in all cases investors would have done well over the subsequent three to four years, as reflected in the following graph. BGA’s p/e ratio is now at a 60% discount to the average company listed in South Africa, a level only seen twice before, in 1994 and 2008. Similarly, its dividend yield is 1.7 times the dividend yield of the average company, matched only in 1994 and 2008. There is indeed some evidence of matters slowly improving: It takes a long time to turn a big ship around. The market doesn’t believe in BGA’s recovery and expectations are low. As a long-term investor, this negative sentiment is in our favour. In the absence of a crystal ball, it is impossible to accurately predict market movements or to foresee a sudden opportunity in shares we like. But we know that, from time to time, we need to be prepared for the unexpected. Three things enable us to react to opportunities with conviction: These factors will continue to allow us to react to opportunities that we hope will contribute to future outperformance. This article was paid for by Allan Gray.