Up to 7,400 jobs could be cut as Sibanye Gold starts restructuring its gold assets in SA, to address continued unprofitability at its Beatrix West mine in the Free State and three Cooke shafts in Gauteng. Sibanye had tried a number of options to restore these operations to profitability, but had failed, said CEO Neal Froneman. The company’s restructuring comes soon after AngloGold Ashanti said it was cutting up to 8,500 jobs or a third of its South African workforce, as it moved to close its old and unprofitable Kopanang and Savuka mines. Anglo American Platinum and Atlatsa Resources have agreed to cease operations at the Bokoni platinum mine with more than 2,000 jobs lost. The Chamber of Mines has said the local mining industry has lost 70,000 jobs in the past five years. The National Union of Mineworkers said Sibanye's figure excluded 3,000 contractors who would be affected by the company's decision, bringing the potential job losses at the two mines to 10,400. Sibanye said it had started a formal process with organised labour at its gold mines in terms of section 189 of the Labour Relations Act, a process intended to find ways to mitigate the number of jobs that could be cut. "Losses experienced at these operations negatively affect group cash flow as well as the sustainability and economic viability of other operations in the Southern Africa region, in this way, posing a threat to more sustainable employment across the region," Froneman said. Sibanye, one of the most aggressive mining companies when it comes to growth, employs 58,000 people in gold and platinum mines in SA. "Approximately 7,400 Sibanye employees at all levels may be affected as a result of the proposed restructuring," Froneman said. "Through the section 189A consultations, the company and affected stakeholders will consider alternatives to potential closure of the operations in an attempt to avoid or reduce retrenchments," he said. "We are, however, aware of the difficult socioeconomic environment in SA, and will engage with all relevant stakeholders in an effort to minimise job losses, while ensuring that additional jobs are not placed at risk in future." The National Union of Mineworkers said Sibanye's figure excluded 3,000 contractors who would be affected by the company's decision, bringing the potential job losses at the two mines to 10,400.