A consortium of Zimbabwean businesspeople in SA is financing the recapitalisation of the defunct National Railways of Zimbabwe (NRZ), say people close to the multimillion-dollar deal, and Transnet is merely a "conduit" in the transaction. Eyebrows have been raised over the likelihood that Transnet would finance the $400m (R5.3bn) tender given the poor state of its books and the likely turmoil that will result from  its being implicated in the Gupta e-mail leaks. Sources close to the deal said that Transnet was roped in for its scale and technical expertise, while the Diaspora Infrastructure Development Group (DIDG) sourced the financing for the recapitalisation from abroad. "They [DIDG] raised the financing from their sources abroad, but could not bring the money directly to Zimbabwe because of sanctions and the associated high risk of investing in Zimbabwe. "So Transnet is the conduit they are using in this transaction," said a source in Harare close to the deal. "Transnet does not have any money and they have changed executives so many times. Approaches made in the past for it to recapitalise NRZ have all failed." Transnet beat five other shortlisted bidders — China Civil Engineering, Sino Hydro, Crowe Horwath & Welsha, SHM Railway of Malaysia and Croyeaux of Zimbabwe — to win the $400m tender. The NRZ’s operations have been severely affected by debt of about $70m, aged equipment, outdated locomotives, defunct track signals and a dire need for infrastructure rehabilitation. At its 1990s peak, the parastatal had a workforce of 12,000, which is now about 5,000, with employee relations severely strained by the nonpayment of salaries. Industrial action — the longest lasted three months in 2016 — has hurt frail revenues. Cargo volumes transported have declined steadily, hovering at about 1-million tonnes from 3.5-million tonnes in 2014. Transnet spokesman Molatwane Likhethe said on Friday that the company was "not yet ready to talk" about the nature of the deal as "some negotiations and finer points" still needed to be worked out. Indications are that the contract is set to be signed this week between Zimbabwe’s State Procurement Board, NRZ, Transnet and the DIDG. Zimbabwe’s Minister of Transport and Infrastructure Development Joram Gumboon said on Friday that the government was "pleased" that the tender had finally been awarded. "We hope to soon see the NRZ back on its feet and operating like it used to in the past. Its revival is a key enabler to the Zimbabwe economy and the transportation of goods and minerals," he said. The revival of the NRZ would fit well into Transnet’s regional strategy based on three corridors, including a "north-south corridor" that would link Zambia through Zimbabwe to SA. In its integrated report for 2017, Transnet said the goal was to have a unified system among rail operators on these routes "as if no boundaries exist between countries involved". Independent transport economist Andrew Marsay said the railways in Zimbabwe had been losing market share to road freight for decades even during periods of significant investment in rail infrastructure. "Most goods, not all, could be moved more conveniently, from a logistics perspective, by road." Marsay questioned the returns on mass infrastructure investment into rail. Unless evidence was produced of the business that would be created in order to make it viable, he was not convinced of the wisdom of the strategy.