It is just a couple of weeks until the Frankfurt Motor Show and, not surprisingly, there will be a number of new electric models. One will be the second generation of the BMW i3, which will also spawn an i3S version. The facelift of the i3 electric car adds straight-line speed and swings in extra power and handling with the i3s, plus the extra range from a 94Ah/33kWh battery pack. It remains a brisk city car rather than a blasting cap like the Tesla Model S, and it has nothing of the Californian brand’s marketing/speed giggles, like its Ludicrous mode. Instead, the stock i3 reaches 100km/h in 7.3 seconds, and that makes it eight-tenths of a second quicker than the range-extender model. The standard synchronous electric motor delivers 125kW and the from-idle torque peak of 250Nm, with BMW limiting its top speed to 150km/h. But that’s not as fast as the i3 range gets, with the new i3s model adding 10kW of power to that figure and stacking on another 20Nm of torque. To get there, BMW gave it new taper roller bearings in the electric motor and an upgraded motor control system. It pulls the sprint to 100km/h down to 6.9 seconds from the rear-drive four seater, with the heavier range-extender version losing 0.8 seconds mostly through adding 120kg to the 1,265kg i3s. It rips to 60km/h in 3.7 seconds and its top end is also 10km/h faster than the standard car, at 160km/h. Mini will also be getting its electric groove on, with the debut of the new Mini Electric. A few years after we tested the prototype Mini-E, the firm will reveal the car that makes sense in the electric market. What’s to come … Mercedes will have a number of new models at Frankfurt. With the Mercedes-AMG Project One the sports car and performance brand is celebrating the highlight of its 50th anniversary. This hypercar with Formula 1 hybrid drive technology points the way to AMG’s "Future of Driving Performance". A new Smart showcar will show what the company says is an intelligent solution for shared urban mobility. Further outlooks on the full electrification of the portfolio will include a concept car in the compact car segment and the GLC F-Cell EQ Power, a pre-series model with fuel cell hybrid drive. Also celebrating their world première at the show are the comprehensively updated S-Class coupé and S-Class cabriolet in both the standard and AMG versions, which round off the model range. What is not known is whether Mercedes will show the new AMG GT4, which is undergoing testing. The new version of the AMG GT is basically a race car for the road and should go on sale in 2018. It will have the same V8 engine as the GT-R pushing out 436kW and is expected to actually be more powerful than the GT4 race car. New Q3 on the way Audi is preparing to launch the new Q3 in 2018. It will finally switch to the Volkswagen Group’s MQB platform and like other Q models will also grow slightly in size, up 60mm in length and 50mm in width. The wheelbase is also expected to grow slightly. Exterior changes will bring it into line with the recently launched Q5 but the major changes will be in the interior where the new Q3 will get Audi’s Virtual Cockpit for the instrument cluster and a cleaner dashboard design. The company is also planning a plug-in hybrid version and a full electric model, which will be based on the architecture of the Volkswagen E-Golf. At the other end of the scale, there will also be a RSQ3 utilising the company’s five-cylinder turbo. Spy within the ranks Pics have emerged of the next generation Suzuki Jimny, but what is a surprise is they seem to have been taken by a Suzuki employee during a company presentation on the new model. Clearly someone in Suzuki is not happy. However, what we know is that the diminutive off-roader will get a more boxy look and go a little retro with funky colours and an almost Jeep Renegade look about it. The interior will also get an upgrade including a touchscreen infotainment system. Suzuki SA says it cannot confirm when it might arrive here. What’s in a name? Finally, some of the most expensive cars ever sold at auction carry the Testarossa name, but Ferrari will never use it again. Because it can’t. Because a court in Germany has ruled Ferrari doesn’t own the badge anymore, and that a German toy maker does. The court’s decision insisted that Ferrari’s 20 years without a Testarossa model meant it had abandoned the name. It instead awarded the rights to the name to toy company Autec AG. Ferrari had claimed ownership of both "Testa Rossa" and "Testarossa" names. While the highest price fetched by any car at auction is for a 1962 250 GTO ($38.1m), the 250 Testa Rossa prototype sold for $16.4m in 2011 for a then world record. A pure racing car, the 250 Testa Rossa began its production run in 1957, then used its V12 power to win the Le Mans 24 Hour race in 1958, 1960 and 1961. Few Testarossas are sold at auction today, with sources insisting many of them change hands privately. The name "Testa Rossa" related to its crackle-red camshaft covers and literally translates from Italian into "red head". It was next used on a Ferrari in a production car, the Testarossa, from 1984 to 2006, selling more than 10,000 flat-12 coupes. The road-going car and its famous side strakes found even wider fame on the third season of the Miami Vice television show after Ferrari threatened the show with a lawsuit if it continued to use replica Daytona Spyders. There are implications for Ferrari beyond Germany, especially if the EU allows the decision to stand throughout Europe. Ferrari is, obviously, expected to appeal.