Parliament is about to adopt the Border Management Authority (BMA) Act. It provides for a new state organ to protect the country’s borders and oversee the administration of border posts. It will be the lead agency for all border-related functions such as customs administration, management of movement of persons and policing. Different disciplines are, by necessity, involved in regulating the movement of goods and persons across borders, and policing national boundaries. Co-ordinated border management has become increasingly important, especially in the context of African trade and regional integration. Delays, other inefficiencies at borders and challenges associated with movement of persons in Africa contribute significantly to the erosion of the continent’s competitiveness. The government has identified "threats to the country’s territorial integrity" as a priority concern and the new law aims to address the longstanding concerns about border security. The two main issues are the management of migration and control of the "border environment". In June 2013, the Cabinet decided on a specific model of co-ordinated border management; the establishment of the BMA, under the Department of Home Affairs. This "integrated agency" is to have control over the entire border management function. The official view is that the present border management problems stem from fragmentation; the various state organs involved in border management are regulated by different laws. It is claimed that this results in uncoordinated mandates and operations. The government believes that a comprehensive BMA, overseeing all specialised border control tasks, is the answer. This is not to deny the importance of border integrity and security; illegal immigration and smuggling are indeed serious problems. SA is a destination for thousands seeking a better life or exploiting lax border procedures. Our border management crisis has everything to do with corruption, the absence of effective administration and respect for the rule of law. It is notable that the objectives of the Act do not include any good governance objectives. How will the new system work? The intention is that the BMA will be responsible and accountable for the entire border environment. Other government departments and agencies will have to cede some responsibilities to the BMA. The authority’ will fall under the minister of Home Affairs, who is empowered to make all necessary regulations, including penalties for noncompliance. A new commissioner will be appointed as head of the authority, to be the commander of the border guard. Special officers will be appointed to exercise the same powers as peace officers under the Criminal Procedure Act. Their powers will include powers of entry, search, seizure, arrest and detention. Several new institutions are foreseen; with the potential to alter the manner in which border administration has traditionally been conducted. The interministerial consultative committee will be chaired by the Home Affairs minister and will include several other Cabinet members. It will consult on the designation or cancellation of a port of entry; the amendment of any legislation affecting border management; any international agreement that affects the authority; and matters referred to it by any of the responsible Cabinet members. The border technical committee consists of the commissioner (who is the chairperson) and the heads of prescribed organs of state. This committee must advise the interministerial consultative committee, which will also decide disputes arising at its meetings. This Act has also to be seen against the background of the fact that SA has to comply with many multilateral and regional trade agreements which require transparent customs procedures and compliance with international standards. Corruption and delays at borders have major cost implications for international trade. Remedies for affected freighters and service providers have proven difficult to implement. The republic is also negotiating new agreements such as the Tripartite Free Trade Area and the Continental Free Trade Area. The latter, in particular, aims to boost intra-African trade by, inter alia, removing barriers to trade, many of which come in the form of cumbersome border controls. The Department of Home Affairs has little, if any, expertise in these areas. The problems faced by government regarding border integrity are real, but it remains to be seen whether the solution embodied in the in the BMA Act will provide the answer. There have been some "clarifications" and promises not to undermine standard border functions, but the implementation of this elaborate system will take time and will not be plain sailing. If it does bring about clean and effective border administration, we will have discovered the answer to many other governance challenges too. • Erasmus is a Trade Law Centre (Tralac) associate