Madrid — Real Madrid coach Zinedine Zidane expressed his anger on Tuesday at a five-game ban handed to Cristiano Ronaldo for pushing a referee after being sent off against Barcelona in the Spanish Super Cup. Madrid hold a 3-1 lead going into the second leg against their rivals on Wednesday, but will have to do without Ronaldo. The World Player of the Year was controversially shown a second yellow card for diving on Sunday and handed an extra four-game ban for a light push on referee Ricardo de Burgos Bengoetxea after being shown the 10th red card of his career. "We are very annoyed. When you look at everything that happened, to think Cristiano won’t play five games with us… it is infuriating," Zidane said. Madrid’s appeal against Ronaldo’s red card, which could reduce the ban from five games to four, will be held before the game on Wednesday. "The [appeals] committee will meet and I hope they look well upon it," Zidane said. "Cristiano is annoyed because he wants to play and when he doesn’t play, he isn’t happy," he said. Ronaldo was on the field for just 24 action-packed minutes on Sunday as he was only introduced, as a second-half substitute after a curtailed preseason due to his participation in the Confederations Cup with Portugal’s national side. He had a huge effect with a stunning strike to put Madrid into a 2-1 lead 10 minutes from time, but unwisely picked up his first yellow card for removing his shirt in celebration. And two minutes later, he was dismissed as he fell inside the area under pressure from Samuel Umtiti. "Cristiano’s ban is excessive," said Madrid defender Dani Carvajal. "It is a frustrating feeling for him. Hopefully, the committee will reduce it [the ban] by a few games." Should Ronaldo’s appeal not be upheld, he will miss Madrid’s first four La Liga games of the season against Deportivo la Coruna, Valencia, Levante and Real Sociedad. However, Zidane insisted he was not desperate to add to his forward line before the transfer window closes on August 31, despite selling strikers Alvaro Morata and Mariano Diaz during the off-season. Real have been linked for months with a move for Monaco’s 18-year-old sensation Kylian Mbappe, but appear set to be beaten to the Frenchman’s signature by free-spending Paris Saint-Germain. "Anything can happen between now and August 31, but what I can say is that I am very happy with the players I have," Zidane said. AFP