Bafana Bafana want a win in Cape Verde‚ then in Durban‚ and to keep on in that vein so that they do not face the final-day permutations and rely on other results the nation SA is so often subjected too‚ says Ramahlwe Mphahlele has said. The Kaizer Chiefs rightback said SA travel to Praia wanting nothing less than three points against the last-placed team in the Russia 2018 World Cup qualifying Group D. Bafana might be in second place on goal difference to Burkina Faso but they are well placed in the group‚ given their upcoming forthcoming fixtures. If SA beat Cape Verde away on Friday night and do it again at come back return to Moses Mabhida Stadium on Tuesday night and do it again‚ then a win at home against Burkina Faso on October 7 might be enough to wrap up qualification before their final game in Senegal on November 11. Though Although What happens between Bukina Burkina Faso and Senegal over the next week will have a bearing on the outcome of Group D. But also key is what happens between the two other protagonists in Group D – Burkina Faso and Senegal. Like SA and their small island opponentsCape Verde‚ the Burkinabe and Senegalese meet each other in quick succession over the next week, with a clash in Dakar on Saturday night and then again in Ouagadougou on Tuesday. SA will be hoping that the twowest West African countries cancel each other out in their two clashes‚ thereby ensuring both they lose potentially vital ground in the race to finish top of the group and take a place in the field for the World CupRussia. The best-case scenario for Bafana is to win their two matches against Cape Verde to go to 10 points after four games and hope there are home wins in the other two group games‚ which would leave Burkina Faso on seven points and thedangerous Senegal floundering on six with the last rounds of qualifiers to come in October and November. Senegal’s star striker Sadio Mane‚ who scored a glittering goal for Liverpool against Arsenal in the English premier Premier League league on Sunday‚ warned that he and his teammates were determined not to let down the Dakar crowd at the weekend. "We are aware of the expectations of the Senegalese public. I can tell them that we will not disappoint them‚" he said in a French television interview after Sunday’s game at Anfield when asked about the upcoming World Cup assignment. At the same time Mphahlele said he and his teammates were confident. "We are going to Cape Verde to win the game. "We’ve made our intentions clear – we want to go there and get a good result‚ come home and get a good result so that we stay in control of our group.‚" Mphahlele said. "We don’t want to be relying on anyone to be doing us any favours. We want to stay in control until the end of this campaign. We had a good run against Nigeria [in June’s 2-0 Africa Cup of Nations victory in Uyo] and a good first-half run against Zambia [in a 2-1 friendly defeat in Rustenburg]. So we’re looking to build on those. "Nobody gave us a chance against Nigeria. But we had a plan in-house on how we were going to destroy Nigeria‚ and it came out perfectly. "We prepare the same no matter who we’re playing. "Yes‚ the public can chose and say: ‘It’s Cape Verde‚ we are expected to beat them.’ But if we don’t beat them we are in trouble," Mphahlele said. So beat them‚ and you can talk after. "The players know what’s at stake. We know how long it’s been since SA qualified for a World Cup. And we really want this badly." "And I think we have the personnel to go there and win the game‚ and then come back and win again." Cape Verde‚ ranked 114th in the world but with a tendency for punching above their weight‚ began their Russia 2018 campaign with 2-0 defeats away against Senegal and at home against Burkina Faso. Bafana drew 1-1 in Burkina Faso and beat Senegal 2-1 at home. TimesLIVE