The Renault Captur has done wonders for the French marque. Since its international launch in 2013 it has sold 800,000 units globally. It is perhaps not surprising as we found it to be up to the task when we reviewed the Dynamique EDC petrol model after its launch locally in 2015. Other than some plastic bits in the cabin that were too hard and a lacklustre automatic gearbox, it delivered handsomely everywhere else. Two years into its local life cycle, the Captur is receiving some key updates. The front end has been spruced up with C-shaped LED daytime running lights and LED headlights, while the rear also gets C-shaped LED lights. New 17-inch alloy wheels have been decked out on the Dynamique models, while skid plates have been introduced to the front and rear valances. In the cabin, contact areas are now offered with plusher, soft-touch materials, which make a big difference imparting the look and feel of a vehicle in a higher class, such as the Kadjar. Centre stage now is a seven-inch touch-enabled infotainment screen, as in the updated Clio, replete with navigation. The 1.2l engine in the flagship Dynamique has been given more teeth and chews out 88kW and 190Nm through a six-speed manual gearbox or the six-speed EDC automatic. It is essentially the same engine as that used in the Clio GT-Line. The fantastic 1.5dCi engine that was available in the limited Sunset edition models is now also available and makes 66kW and 220Nm through a five-speed manual transmission. You can still get the 66kW and 135Nm petrol and that engine is available in the entry-level Blaze, as well as the Expression and Dynamique. Yes, that’s correct, the 1.2 is available in two states of tune, but the nice thing is you can opt for the lower-powered model without sacrificing specification. At launch we drove only the Dynamique diesel and the more powerful Dynamique petrol variant over tarmac surfaces, cut-and-thrust urban situations and gravel roads. The diesel offered effortless progress from the get-go, but I felt that it could do with an overdrive sixth gear on the freeway. On gravel, it felt surprisingly stable while build integrity was also put to the test. There were no rattles, even when the gravel got rutted. However, it was the 88kW petrol that felt better to drive overall, thanks not only to its zesty performance but that sixth gear meant an even more relaxed drive on the open road. With a starting price of R229,900 for the entry Blaze and going up to R309,900 for the 88kW Dynamique EDC, the range is relatively well priced although pricing overlaps that of the Duster crossover from the mid-spec model Captur. Granted, the two models are aimed at different buyers, but it will be interesting to see how the two models are marketed on the same dealer floor.