Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba faces an early test of his commitment to his 14-point action plan for inclusive growth. He is being asked to guarantee a Chinese loan for construction of a dam on the Mzimvubu River in the Eastern Cape, but must have been hoping no one would notice. The Department of Water and Sanitation’s own documents make it clear that the dam will never be financially viable as conceived at present. Nor will it meet social or economic objectives in a cost-effective or rapid way. It will require ongoing subsidisation to repay the loan and to fund its operation. Yet point four of the Gigaba action plan states categorically that it aims to "reduce the issuance of government guarantees, especially for operational reasons". As it stands, this is a classic social project that should be funded from budgetary resources. Using loan finance is simply a device to evade budgetary scrutiny. Currently budgeted at more than R14.7bn, this project is surely in need of scrutiny. The Ntabelanga Dam on the Mzimvubu’s Tsitsa tributary is proposed to supply water for a rural area that stretches from Maclear to Tsolo. There are other, cheaper sources of water in the area. But it was argued that it made sense as a multipurpose project. Unfortunately, the other purposes, specifically agriculture and energy production, are unlikely to be achieved. It is now proposed to take water from the dam to a R1bn water-treatment works and distribute it through a huge, 1,800km bulk pipe network that will cost R7bn — and that is before water is connected to communities and individual households. In terms of policy, connections and operations will have to be funded by the ORTambo, Alfred Nzo and Joe Gqabi district municipalities, among the poorest and weakest in the land. An additional R730m is budgeted for an irrigation scheme. However, the Eastern Cape department of rural development has said that the money would be much better spent on "a series of smaller dams in the vicinity of high-potential irrigation land". It points out that there is very limited irrigable land near the proposed dam site and the cost of pumping water to those sites means that "farmers will not be able to afford water tariffs". The original intent was also to produce about 100MW of hydropower, which could be sold as valuable peaking power to Eskom, not least to balance the variable output from the expanding wind and solar installations in the region. That ambition has now been curtailed and only 37MW is proposed, which will be used to pump the water to homes and farmers — at a cost significantly higher than Eskom’s tariffs. So, why is the project going ahead while budgetary constraints are growing and the finance minister is promising greater discipline to control the government’s rising debt? The idea of damming the Mzimvubu River, SA’s third largest, has a long history. It flows to the sea at Port St Johns almost unused. In part, that is because of topography. Much of it passes through very deep and beautiful gorges from which it would be difficult and expensive to pump water for use by communities on the higher ground. In the 1980s, Eskom considered building a hydropower dam on the main stem of the river near Port St Johns. It could have generated at least 500MW reliably, but costs were high and the environmental objections were obvious. However, in a country that already uses 35% of its water and where economically developed areas such as Gauteng have to bring water from ever further afield, it makes sense to look for development opportunities where there is water rather than simply to take water somewhere else. That was the initial thinking behind the current project. One study has shown that intensive irrigated agriculture — growing high-value crops such as vegetables and fruit — could profitably use the water. This is the kind of development the Department of Economic Development and the National Development Plan (NDP) seek to promote. A hydropower station on the site would also be viable if it was designed to balance the variable supply from the wind and solar generators that are being built in the region, and if Eskom was willing to pay the true value of this reliable and instantly dispatchable power. Adding water supply to the multipurpose mix might then make sense. But neither the agricultural authorities nor Eskom are interested. So, this is now an extremely expensive domestic water-supply project rather than a multipurpose regional development effort. Little has been done to bring the agriculture and energy sectors on board and to overcome the obstacles that they have identified. The Mzimvubu project, first promised by President Jacob Zuma in his 2012 state of the nation address, has now become a political and reputational issue. The promise of construction jobs has excited communities, although they might be less excited if they knew how much the water will cost them. There is also the small matter of elections in 2019. The job of the Treasury is to put a stop to this. It must demand feasibility studies that look at all the options. If the power and agriculture proposals are not viable, why are the cheaper water-supply options not on the table? Where services are to be paid for by users, will the municipalities — and the consumers themselves — be able to pay for them? If not, where will the money come from, or will there simply be more dry taps? Loan financing is inappropriate, particularly if it is to be denominated in foreign currency. This project offers no prospect of significant cost recovery. The recourse to a loan is an obvious ruse to bypass budgetary processes. The issue of a guarantee in these circumstances would be an abuse — the guarantee will be called in the moment the first payment is due unless the costs are sneaked back into the department’s budget. Mzimvubu thus offers the finance minister an opportunity to show SA that he is serious about his action plan. We watch with interest. • Muller is a visiting adjunct professor at the Wits School of Governance. As a national planning commissioner (2010-15), he encouraged the (sensible) development of Mzimvubu River resources, as proposed in  the NDP.