The ANC in Johannesburg claims it has learnt of the imminent axing of Johannesburg’s member of the mayoral committee (MMC) for finance, Rabelani Dagada. This comes as mayor Herman Mashaba has "personally" taken charge of the billing crisis in the city. Mashaba has instructed the finance department in the metro to give regular feedback to him on the status of interventions undertaken to address the billing debacle, which has been a problem for years. The finance department traditionally falls under the political leadership of the finance MMC. When contacted for comment on Tuesday evening, Dagada said he had no comment, and referred all queries to the mayor’s office. "The imminent firing of councillor Dagada comes amid continued problems in the city’s revenue department regarding the escalating billing crisis, which in the words of the mayor ’has reached unprecedented proportions’," ANC spokesperson for the greater Johannesburg region Jolidee Matongo said in the statement. "The recent emotionally charged outbursts by mayor Mashaba on billing and his flimsy commitment to take over the resolution of the billing crisis are just a smokescreen to project Mashaba as a no nonsense leader who is committed to fix problems," Matongo said. The ANC says Mashaba has "messed up the system and now seeks a sacrificial lamb to take the blame for his ill-thought decisions". Matongo said Mashaba had changed the executive management team of the revenue department three times in 12 months; that he had destabilised City Power, a key revenue contributor, by suspending MD Sicelo Xulu; that he has fired the city’s group chief financial officer and that the treasurer had resigned. In response to the ANC statement, Mashaba’s spokesperson, Luyanda Mfeka, said on Tuesday evening that the mayor "has taken a hands-on approach to fixing the billing system mess that he inherited from an inept and corrupt ANC administration". He said Mashaba was impatient at the rate of progress in addressing the problems and was working closely with Dagada to ensure that solutions were sought as soon as possible. "The mayor’s hands-on approach is, of course, different to that of former mayor Parks Tau, who was more concerned with tours and self-aggrandising promotions. It’s no surprise the ANC doesn’t recognise good governance when it sees it," Mfeka said.