Usain Bolt’s farewell will be the major talking point at the world championships, but South African speedster Wayde van Niekerk’s bid for the 200m and 400m double could take some of the spotlight off the Jamaican. The track athletics great has dubbed the 25-year-old Van Niekerk the sport’s next superstar and that is likely to be reinforced at the global showpiece event in London, which starts on Friday. But a showdown between the pair, who are good friends and trained together in Jamaica in 2017, will not happen, with Bolt running only the 100m and relay to mark the end of his bright career. "One person I know who will step up, and he’s been doing good work, is Van Niekerk. He’s shown that he really wants to take my place. He’s been dominating in all events — I feel like if he runs the 800, he’d probably do well also," Bolt said before the Diamond League meeting in Monaco last week in which Van Niekerk won the 400m with the best time of the year. Cape Town-born Van Niekerk is the reigning world champion and he broke Michael Johnson’s 17-year-old world record to win Olympic gold in Rio de Janeiro in 2016. All this in a race he dislikes. "I think most everyone knows that the 400m is not my favourite distance. I know it’s a bit crazy. I enjoy the shorter distances," he said. "I try to tell myself that I need to be more positive about the 400m, it is the race that has placed me at the top." This time, Van Niekerk will attempt the 200m and 400m double, which marked out Johnson as the star of the 1996 Atlanta Olympics after the ruling body of world athletics changed the London programme to make it possible. In June, he ran personal bests in both the 100m (9.94 seconds) and 200m (19.84) and a world record 30.81 in the rarely run 300m. Van Niekerk is the only sprinter in history to have run the 100m in under 10 seconds, the 200m in under 20 and the 400m in sub 44. "I’m in great shape. My record of 300m has given me confidence, so I look forward to see how it translates into the other two events," he added. His coach, Ans Botha — a 75-year-old grandmother — says they have been training for both events since the 2016 Olympics in Rio. "It is the 400m that put him on the stage and which has made him strong mentally, but Wayde doesn’t like it," she said. "After Rio, he told me he needed new challenges and that he wanted to double at the world championships. I’ve had to adapt my programme because I’m there to share his dreams," Botha said. Meanwhile, world 800m recordholder David Rudisha has pulled out of the championships due to a quad muscle strain. Rudisha, reigning Olympic and world champion, is the first and only person to run the 800m under 1 minute 41 seconds. He would have been one of the star names at the event in London from August 4 to 13. "It’s sad and disappointing to announce my no show in the forthcoming #london2017 WC due to a quad muscle strain," the 28-year-old Kenyan said on Twitter on Monday. Rudisha won his first 800m world title in Daegu in 2011, a year before his world record performance at the Olympics in the same London Stadium where the world championships are being held. A knee injury in 2013 forced him to miss out on defending his title in Moscow but he recovered to reclaim his crown in Beijing two years ago. Rudisha said in July that he was in better form than 2016, when he successfully defended his Olympic title in Rio. But he hinted in May he had fitness problems when he said he experienced a "minor strain", which kept him outside the top three in Shanghai’s Diamond League meeting that month. Rudisha was expected to be one of 49 Kenyan athletes heading to London this week. The first wave of the team is due to arrive in the British capital on Tuesday. No announcement has been made whether Rudisha’s place in the squad will be filled by another athlete. There are four other 800m runners in Kenya’s team: Emmanuel Korir, Michael Saruni, Ferguson Rotich and Kipyegon Bett. Reuters