London — Caster Semenya contributed richly to SA’s medal haul in London, but already her coach is wondering about the country’s new generation of stars. Jean Verster believes picking full-strength teams — which Athletics SA did not do for this world championship — is an important step in grooming the future heroes. Semenya and Wayde van Niekerk won two medals each with long-jumpers Luvo Manyonga and Ruswahl Samaai delivering the other two as SA banked a record six gongs. Lebo Shange finished fourth in the 20km walk and Akani Simbine fifth in the 100m. And then a gap. "It would be nice if we had more placings as well and, looking at it critically, we need to look at the next generation," Verster said. "We’ve got a few stars now, but we’ve got to make sure the new bunch comes through as well. "I think that’s what we’ve done pretty well over the last decade… getting youngsters exposed to these type of championships," Verster said. Van Niekerk and Simbine failed to progress past the heats at their first world championships in Moscow in 2013. "I believe we should have brought as many as possible and the guys who stayed behind should have been here," said Verster, referring to the 14 athletes omitted from the team because of Athletics SA’s stringent selection policy. The 14 had all achieved the qualifying standards set down by the world governing body, the IAAF, but they had fallen short of the stiffer marks imposed by the federation. Athletics SA insisted they would not have advanced to the semifinals or made the top 16. But of the 14 athletes, seven produced performances this season that were better than the qualifying times for semifinals or 16th-placed finishers in London. In deciding to leave those athletes out, Athletics SA erroneously calculated standards that were far tougher than actually required to make semifinals or finish in the top 16. Particularly unlucky were Henricho Bruintjies (men’s 100m), Rynardt van Rensburg (men’s 800m), Alyssa Conley (women’s 200m), Fredriech Pretorius (decathlon) and any three of the four 400m hurdlers, Cornel Fredericks, Constant Pretorius, LJ van Zyl and Leroux Hamman. The reasons Athletics SA gave for leaving them out turned out to be flawed: In the men’s 100m, Athletics SA predicted 9.99sec would be needed to make the semifinals, but that time would have been good enough for fourth place in the London final; In the men’s 800m the 1:44.80 it forecast would have taken bronze; In the men’s 400m hurdles, its 48.50 qualifying standard would have taken bronze; In the women’s 200m its predicted 22.42 would have ended fifth in the final; and, In the decathlon, Athletics SA’s 8,172 points to make the top 16 would have been good enough for ninth place. But the problems with Athletics SA’s selection policy do not end there. For one, it was not applied consistently because of the 24 athletes competing in individual events, 16 had met SA’s criteria and the other eight were picked on IAAF standards. Second, Athletics SA’s tougher qualifying standards did not guarantee good performances. Only eight of the 16 ASA qualifiers advanced past the first round of their competitions. At 50%, it was not significantly higher than the three-out-of-eight IAAF qualifiers who did progress. Justine Palframan and Gena Lofstrand made the semifinals in the women’s 200m and 800m, and walker Shange missed a podium spot by just one position. It should be okay to fail too — especially when this leads to success later. That is how to groom the next generation.