The redistribution of wealth in the South African economy is dependent on the participation of all the stakeholders, namely business, labour, the government and civil society. It is imperative that we draw all of our energies together to drive the economic emancipation of the poor black populace for the welfare of all our citizens. In the first rounds of BEE transactions, we made the colossal error of allowing politically connected black individuals to participate in empowerment deals on behalf of all black people. We all know where that got us. Some people reminded us "they never joined the struggle to be poor". Worst of all, too many black people are now charity cases who get fed through the charitable foundations of the first lot of BEE beneficiaries. After seeing our mistakes, we amended the codes. All sorts of broad-based BEE share schemes were born, but they are also proving to be a miscalculation. It is for this reason I am now proposing the creation of a sovereign wealth fund. It must be brought into being through a constitutional amendment that will ensure the fund’s independence from the government. It must have a similar status to that of the South African Reserve Bank. It must be managed independently from the state, even though it will be a state-owned entity. The ownership element of the broad-based BEE codes should be amended to ensure a 10% share is credited to the fund. The balance should be shared among employees and communities. Only 5% of that ownership should be reserved for individual black entrepreneurs who have the capacity to finance their own acquisitions. And ways must be found to accommodate new players in that 5%, instead of the usual suspects. Wealthy black people (the usual suspects) can still do transactions in the open market. How will such transactions be funded? Most BEE deals were funded by institutions such as commercial banks, the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) and the corporates themselves. We can still use these funding models where available. Some development finance institutions, such as the Industrial Development Corporation, National Empowerment Fund, Development Bank of Southern Africa, Small Enterprise Finance Agency and Isibaya Fund, should be amalgamated with the sovereign wealth fund. Their balance sheets should be used to kick-start the fund. What will be the difference between the PIC and the fund? The PIC is a pension fund; it has an obligation to preserve workers’ pensions. The sovereign fund should push a developmental agenda. It should have a clear mandate to fund education and primary healthcare (30%) and give business loans and grant funding to black entrepreneurs (60%). The remainder would be a reserve to cushion the economy should the need arise. The intricacies of the funding mechanisms and the approach to BEE need detailed study and wide consultation. I’m aware of the complexities of the model I’m proposing. The fundamental difference to the current empowerment model is that the sovereign wealth fund will broaden the scope of beneficiaries and help drive economic growth through the creation of black-owned businesses that are not dependent solely on state procurement. We can strengthen the enterprise and supplier development element in the codes to improve black entrepreneurs’ access to private sector procurement. Twenty-three years into the democratic dispensation, the current economic policies have made a commendable difference to many people in SA. However, most remain structurally excluded and have little hope of inclusion in the formal economy. There are various arguments showing that the current policy trajectory is nearing its capacity to deliver further economic transformation. Even the much touted radical economic transformation, a term coined for a much needed new era, is doomed to fail based on its founding principles and what it seeks to promote. I believe its proponents are not offering a new position on transformation or practical interventions, but are essentially "repackaging" what is already there. It appears to be populist rhetoric founded on weak principles without any concrete proposals. The current transformation framework, together with public sector procurement policies, are not supporting sustained empowerment or mitigating SA’s unemployment challenges. They constrain black entrepreneurs and do not encourage a culture of innovation because they demand that they participate in foolproof business ventures. In essence, existing transformation policies are fixated on substituting a white construct for a black one without thought of value-creation to grow the pie. A concerted effort must be made to build businesses that can create jobs and lead the fourth industrial revolution in Africa. Starting this journey with the support of a sovereign wealth fund will improve our children’s prospects for a brighter future. • Nomlala chairs the Black Management Forum in the Western Cape. He writes in his personal capacity.