I have never seen the trust deficit between governments, business and society as depleted as it is today. We live in a more nationalistic world, with creeping resistance to foreigners. People are losing faith that governments and big business hold the solutions to society’s challenges. There’s too little to show from 50 years of industry and government collaboration in the Niger Delta, for example, or copper mining in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These industries have been extractive rather than additive. Corporate social responsibility programmes and government handouts have failed to develop and diversify these regions. Creeping nationalism has manifested itself in governments imposing tougher and more nationalistic regulations. Witness the example of MTN in 2016 and the record fine imposed by Nigerian regulators, or the swathe of new regulations in Tanzania. Regulatory risk has overtaken currency risk as the biggest concern for CEOs. So, what lessons can be drawn from all of this for prospects and trade for UK and sub-Saharan African firms? To be competitive today, trade and investment deals must be transformative. Deals must be designed to maximise productivity and job creation. Transactions are out of vogue. This is good news for Britain because if the value of deals is going to be judged by their value to society and transformative appeal rather than the size of investment, then that is an area in which the UK can excel. To do so requires the British government to graduate to a more integrated and holistic model of trading and investing in Africa — a whole-of-government approach to creating shared prosperity that breaks down the traditional silos of aid, trade, security and investment. This can be done by supporting companies to identify and broker backward, sideways and forward linkages that integrate supply chains into the national economy and create more opportunities for indigenous firms. That must be the goal. The UK department for international development and department of international trade could play an important role in helping to convene multi-actor coalitions to deliver this type of collective effect, which in turn will deliver exponential new sourcing and export opportunities for indigenous and British businesses. Now is the time for Britain to show real vision and clear leadership in tackling productivity, jobs and creating shared value. This requires market-based solutions to reduce poverty. In so doing, the UK government can realise its ambition of Global Britain as a partner to developing nations — in Africa and throughout the world — and open new trading opportunities to UK firms. The current UK policy of untied aid and assertive commercial diplomacy is confusing and confounding. And with Brexit on the cards, everything from visa policy to department for international development funding and the importance of the UK-Africa relationship seems far from certain. With so many known unknowns, it’s crucial that Britain has a clear vision of the relationship it wants with Africa and to communicate it clearly in order to build trust and confidence. Having tackled the need to shift to models of business that are hardwired to deliver long-term transformation, let me discuss the second most important change I’d like to see: reciprocity. We need to rebalance decades of asymmetric trade relations. We need to place much greater emphasis on shared prosperity. Brexit clearly provides an opportunity to reset Britain’s trade relationships with Africa. The first step is to be pragmatic. Britain must choose where it can add and derive most value. The UK’s prosperity agenda prioritises eight high-growth countries, so we can take that as a starting point. Britain’s role is not to play it safe. In a post-Brexit environment where the next generation – in the UK and in Africa – expects so much, Britain needs to act boldly and go for growth. Reciprocity must entail the creation of opportunities for African business in the UK. There are few examples of this — we need more. There are more examples of equity investments, such as the Public Investment Corporation in Anglo American or Botswana’s government in De Beers, but we need more. The UK should be a natural second home for many Africans and African businesses for all the reasons we know and understand – a hub for sourcing capital and advisory services and for accessing global markets. Now I realise that what I have set out takes some explaining so that everyone can see what is at stake and what is in it for them. I realise too that it’s a noisy and competitive world – many nations are engaging African nations with their own agendas and ambitions. So, the UK’s government must get good at representing the whole of Britain’s value proposition to ensure African stakeholders understand what Global Britain brings to the table — and why. UK plc’s ability to succeed in Africa relies on Africans feeling they can succeed in the UK, firstly by being able to travel to Britain (visa policies are still too restrictive) but, equally importantly, being able to raise capital, source new export markets and find growth opportunities. It’s in our common interest to deal with this. • Courage (@Cour8ge) is AfricaPractice CEO.