The 1978 cult horror movie, The Swarm, told how millions of killer bees threatened to wipe out the human race. Almost 40 years on, a new swarm could be its saving — intelligent cars. The world is urbanising at an alarming rate. The UN reckons that, around the world, city populations will grow by 1.1-billion between now and 2030. Africa’s cities, says business consultancy McKinsey, will be home to an additional 24-million inhabitants every year between now and 2045. The potential for chaos is huge: not just from people, but also from vehicles. Cities already choking with exhaust fumes and traffic can’t cope with more. That’s where the swarms come in: thousands of cars "thinking" together to find a common solution. Most of the automotive headlines in recent times have been about autonomous, self-driving cars. But that’s no good if they simply replace human-operated ones. Cities need fewer vehicles — and smarter ones. Vehicle-to-infrastructure technology, known as V2I, enables cars to "talk" to the road, gathering and sharing information on traffic build-ups, weather, road conditions and other issues. Vehicle-to-vehicle technology, or V2V, will allow cars to talk to each other. Trevor Hill, head of Audi’s South African operations, says: "The car of the near future will be constantly collecting masses of data to facilitate automated driving in a type of traffic-swarm intelligence. One car on its own knows little; many cars know a lot. Each individual car can enhance the overall performance of all cars by providing data via the cloud." According to the Automotive News: "By relaying information back and forth amongst each other, vehicles on the road will be able to alert drivers of potential traffic incidents before they can see it coming. Future systems will allow vehicles to send braking, speed and direction information to other enabled cars, helping to sort out hairy situations immediately." The US state of Michigan is preparing to start work on a 5km stretch of highway containing networking technology able to interact with car sensors. There has also been talk of making V2I and V2V technology mandatory in all new cars. According to Automotive News: "The idea is to equip every new car on the road with dedicated short-range communications technology so vehicles can talk with each other. "This would work with existing safety technology like automatic braking and adaptive cruise control." Planners want the technology gradually rolled out across the US. Some other countries have similar projects. Predictably, not everyone likes the idea. Some doubters say that rules must protect the privacy  of messages communicated between cars. Until now, the integration of automotive and urban development has been largely haphazard. That has to change, say planners. "The city and the car have been interacting for generations, but this latest phase of their evolution is different," says Hill. "Instead of urban planners designing cities around the automobile, engineers and developers are now designing cars around the functionality of the city." Changing consumer needs are blending in with this intent. In developed countries, there is a shift away from vehicle ownership towards vehicle usage. Mobility — the buzzword of transport development — is all about getting from A to B in the simplest, most cost-effective way. People use whatever form of transport is most practical, including public transport such as buses and trains. Increasingly, in developed cities that often negates the need for vehicle ownership. The rise of car-share schemes such as Uber is testament to this. Everyone is piling in. Vehicle maker Ford is expanding its Chariot shuttle service across the US, using 12-seater Transit vans to ferry people across cities from homes. The vans, which according to business consultancy KPMG, each remove about 10 cars from the road, use real-time traffic data to find the fastest, safest routes. More futuristic schemes are on the horizon. Uber is talking of a "flying-car" taxi service: a regular Uber car takes you to a "launchpad" where what is effectively a small helicopter takes you to your destination in a fraction of the time that a car would take. "On-demand aviation has the potential to radically improve urban mobility, giving people back time lost in their daily commutes," says Uber. Given the rate of global urbanisation, which will increase demand for convenient mobility, it’s no wonder that almost every forward-looking study shows that vehicle sales will decline as usage trumps ownership. A 2017 KPMG report suggests half of current car owners think they will eventually give up their vehicles. One of its authors, Dieter Becker, thinks UK car sales will drop 20% by 2030. In SA, as across the rest of Africa, where car ownership is still a highly desirable — and mostly unattainable — status symbol, reduced ownership demand is still a long way off. So, because of infrastructural and developmental issues, are many general mobility ideas. But they will arrive eventually. Hill says that manufacturers must recognise the likelihood of declining sales for what they are: a push to "drive progress around innovation in the mobility space". Almost without exception, manufacturers are seeking ways to do just that. "While we are synonymous with making cars, we are also reinventing the way cars are used," he says. For example, the Audi Urban Future Initiative is working with city planners to find ways for technology to make life easier for residents and businesses. In Boston, it is engaged in pilot projects to ease city-centre traffic flow and develop automated parking to create more space for other modes of traffic. It is also working with real estate developers to combine benefits of automated parking and smart fleet management. In the Santa Fe business district of Mexico City, Audi is helping the local business association to develop ways to end permanent traffic congestion. "This paradigm shift towards mobility that is compatible with the city will eventually make for an intelligent, sustainable and liveable city with zero emissions and networked traffic that flows easily," says Hill. "At the heart of this new concept will be the individual, accessing mobility in the way most convenient to him or her, in harmony with the city, the environment and other road users," he says.