Last month we reported Honda had revealed a new Jazz (Fit) in the US. The current model in SA has come in for criticism for perceived quality issues, particularly when it comes to the interior. At the moment Honda SA sources the Jazz from India and so we chased Honda to find out if it would bring us a different kind of Jazz. Initially the company would not comment but then we cornered its vice-president Graham Eagle at the launch of the new CR-V. He told us the current Jazz has not been as successful as expected and preferred not to comment directly on whether that is due to those perceived quality issues. However, Eagle says the company is planning to replace the current model with the new version you see here. We are not sure exactly when that will be, but expect it to be before the end of the year. Raptor takes flight You know all those Ford Rangers with their big after-market Ford logo across the grille, big wheels and various decals? Ford has tried to counter it with the Ranger FX4 but it is not quite the real deal. The real thing is the F150 Raptor in the US. You might see people with Raptor stickers on their pimped Rangers in SA, but they are not Raptors. But the real thing could be coming, because Ford is testing a Raptor version of the new Ranger in the US. Ford SA told us it knows nothing about it but would love to bring it so for you and for Ford SA, here is what our sources have told us. Firstly, the test mules spotted were right-hand drive, meaning it could come here. Secondly, it will feature a diesel engine, making it more likely to be a global vehicle than purely a US one. That engine is likely to be the 3.2 turbodiesel although of course producing more power than in any model we have. However, our sources have suggested there might also be a detuned version of the 3.5 V6 Ecoboost from the Ford GT supercar — in a Ranger! It’ll be detuned slightly of course and if it comes here, we’ll probably only get the diesel. Other changes over regular models, as if the engine from the GT would not be enough, is wider wheel arches, increased ride height, upgraded suspension and bigger wheels and tyres. So now we wait to see if Ford SA is keen to bring a real Raptor here. People in Boksburg will lose their minds. What legacy is that? Infiniti has revealed a stunning concept for the Pebble Beach Concours in the US this week. It is a superb recreation of the iconic Infiniti Formula One car of the 1940s. What? Infiniti didn’t compete in F1 in the 1940s. Quite right, which makes the concept, as stunning as it is, rather bizarre. The company says the Prototype 9 "re-imagines what might have been for a 1940s Infiniti grand prix race car". If the concept is anything to go by, then that 1940s Infiniti F1 car would have been electric. Except it wouldn’t. An electric F1 car would have been laughable, actually impossible, in the 1940s. It is easy for us to laugh at Infiniti and criticise the concept which, let’s face it, is clearly inspired by a number of 1940s F1 cars that actually did exist, but this was an outside office hours project for the company’s design team. And we actually like its design. No more moving please When BMW and Volkswagen added new MPV models to their line-up we thought it strange. The MPV or people-mover market has been dying for years, replaced like so many other genres by SUVs. Both companies tried to be clever and claim they were not strictly MPVs though. BMW called its effort the 2 Series Active Tourer while VW had something slightly less catchy in the Golf Sportsvan (SV). The marketing people tried hard to present them as vehicles for those with active lifestyles, those who need to fit a mountain bike in the back, those who need flexibility for when they need to fit in two kids, a pair of roller-blades and a kitchen sink. Hardly anybody fell for it and BMW and VW have killed off their respective attempts in our market. Unless it is in this While BMW and VW can their MPV models, Chinese company BYD has revealed a new one that will have both its European counterparts shaking their heads in disbelief. We are astonished too, partly because, for the first time, we want a Chinese car. And it’s an MPV. Chinese car maker BYD has revealed its new Song Max seven-seater. Not a big deal you might think, but it is a MPV that can outrun a BMW M3. Along with seven seats, it features a four-cylinder engine and not one, but two electric motors, together producing 333kW and 740Nm of torque. We can only imagine the look on a M3 driver’s face as the kids wave from the window. The peril of the # Finally this week, a warning to social media people. Whoever was (the word "was" almost definitely applies here) in charge of the Nissan India Twitter feed made a major faux pas when they tweeted that the GTR had achieved a production car lap record at the Nurburgring. Except it wasn’t the Nissan GTR, it was the Mercedes-AMG GTR. #lookingforanewjob