The arrest of Deputy Higher Education Minister Mduduzi Manana, whose vicious assault of a woman at the weekend was caught on video, is "imminent", but police refused on Wednesday to give an exact date. However, Police Minister Fikile Mbalula said in Khayelitsha on Wednesday that Manana had been ordered to appear in court on Thursday. The police’s handling of the case is in contrast to the KFC assault case, whose suspects were arrested swiftly and have already appeared in court. The fact that Manana had not been arrested on Wednesday raised questions about the police’s commitment to fight gender-based violence. Since the incident at the Cubana in Fourways, Johannesburg, another woman has come forward to detail how she too was allegedly assaulted by Manana in Ermelo. Manana apologised this week for assaulting Mandisa Duma at Cubana, saying in a statement that he should not have acted the way he did despite "extreme provocation". Vuyo Mhaga, Mbalula’s spokesman, said on Wednesday that the police investigation into Manana’s conduct was at an advanced stage. "As soon as we conclude that, we will be able to take the docket to the senior public prosecutor for a decision," Mhaga said. But he could not give a time for when Manana would be arrested, saying this depended on a variety of outstanding issues. But he said that it was "quite imminent". Mbalula seemed to be under a different impression, because he said Manana’s "flashy suits" would not save the deputy minister from the might of the law. On Wednesday, Mbalula visited the family of a woman who was allegedly beaten to death by her boyfriend. Parliament urged on Wednesday "the appropriate authorities to act expeditiously on the matter involving ... Manana", in a statement released to mark Women’s Day. The Department of Higher Education and Training distanced itself from the deputy minister’s actions, saying the matter was now in the hands of the authorities. "The relevant authorities are already looking into the matter and it is appropriate that they be allowed to do their work unhindered," the department said. "[We are] fully co-operating and wish a swift conclusion to the investigations." Department spokeswoman Busiswa Gqangeni refused to comment any further on the matter on Wednesday and referred Business Day to the statements it had released. The National Education, Health and Allied Workers Union (Nehawu), the biggest union in the public sector, has also waded in on the allegations levelled against Manana. On Wednesday, Nehawu spokesman Khaya Xaba condemned the violent act and called for the full might of the law to fall on Manana. Xaba said the union was of the view that this incident should have never happened. "As a deputy minister, he should be at the forefront of the battle to protect ... women." Manana, who remained deputy minister, did not attend Tuesday’s sitting of the National Assembly, contrary to reports that he did.