London — Romelu Lukaku enjoyed a dream Premier League debut for Manchester United, as the Belgian’s brace inspired a 4-0 rout of West Ham, while Jonjo Shelvey’s dismissal was the pivotal moment in Tottenham’s 2-0 win at Newcastle on the opening weekend of the season on Sunday. United manager Jose Mourinho paid a British record of £75m to sign Lukaku from Everton in the close-season and the 24-year-old needed just 33 minutes to get off the mark for his new club. Accelerating on Marcus Rashford’s pass, Lukaku drilled a powerful strike in off the post to put Man United ahead in their Premier League opener at Old Trafford. Lukaku was virtually unplayable at times and he doubled United’s advantage in the 53rd minute with a bullet header from Henrikh Mkhitaryan’s free-kick. Substitute Anthony Martial added United’s third, slotting past Joe Hart in the 87th minute, before Paul Pogba’s 90th minute strike sent Mourinho’s men to the top of the table above Huddersfield on goal difference. "To play in front of such a crowd is a dream come true, but most importantly is the three points," Lukaku said. "When you play for Manchester United, you have a job to do and mine is to score goals. "The manager wants me to be a leader for the team and create as much as I can. "The fans want to see attractive football and we have to stick to that. They will be pleased today. It is just the start, we need to keep working to the manager’s plan." Once sold by Mourinho when the pair were at Chelsea together, Lukaku could be the catalyst for a first serious title challenge from United since Alex Ferguson retired in 2013. Lukaku was not the only impressive United debutant, with Nemanja Matic delivering a solid display that underlined why Chelsea manager Antonio Conte was so miffed his club sanctioned the £40m sale of the Serbia midfielder to a title rival. At St James’ Park, Shelvey was sent off early in the second half for deliberately treading on Tottenham star Dele Alli, who was on the ground only yards from referee Andre Marriner. Alli got his revenge by firing Tottenham ahead in the 61st minute with a cool close strike from Christian Eriksen’s superb lofted pass. Left back Ben Davies increased his side’s lead in the 70th minute. "It was important to start with three points, but it wasn’t a great game and wasn’t our best performance," Spurs manager Mauricio Pochettino said. AFP