As the desire for South African students to go to university increases, the need to prepare them well for university increases too. Many studies have found that students excel more at university when they are taught to be active and deep learners. A study from the National Academy of Sciences of the US shows that students in a traditional lecture course are one-and-a-half times more likely to fail, compared with students doing the same course where active learning is encouraged. A study by the University of SA also supported active learning in the classroom. It focused on two groups of students from grade 11. The first group was taught using only traditional methods of learning, while the second group was taught using active learning approaches (ALA). The study found that students taught using ALA performed better than those taught using traditional methods. Active learning requires students to engage in teaching and use analysis, evaluation, problem solving, synthesis, critical reasoning and creativity. Beginning at primary school level, active learning develops understanding so that students can apply what they have learnt to solve problems, which is a necessary skill as they move on to universities, and then careers. However, many South African students are not encouraged to learn actively in the classroom. Rather, emphasis is on content knowledge, such as memorising facts. As a result, while they leave school with solid subject knowledge, they fail to understand the "why" behind it and are not capable of applying their knowledge to new situations. Improving teaching is the single most important intervention a school can make to improve learning and performance. Excellent teachers are highly reflective of their classroom practice and focus not only on the outcomes of learning, but also on the process of learning. This process should focus on three critical components of learning: preconceptions, deep learning and meta-cognition. Preconceptions All students come to the classroom with preconceptions. Preconceptions begin to form in their preschool years as they try to understand the phenomena around them. These initial understandings, or preconceptions can sometimes be accurate, providing a foundation for learning to be built on. Sometimes, however, they are not, leading to misconceptions which must be addressed by teachers prior to learning new information. This is especially true for South African students, who may learn new concepts for the purposes of a test but revert to their preconceptions outside the classroom. Therefore, effective teaching includes a process of eliciting from students their pre-existing understanding of a subject and providing opportunities to build on, or challenge, that initial understanding. This can be as simple as showing that one-sixth is smaller than one-third despite the basic knowledge that six is larger than three. Deep learning The next step would be to adopt deep learning, which requires students to go beyond the understanding of factual knowledge. They are encouraged to grasp facts and ideas in the context of a conceptual framework and to organise knowledge in ways that facilitate retrieval and application. The traditional teaching approach still occurs in many parts of SA, especially in more rural areas where teaching is often based on textbooks, and students often learn a large set of disconnected facts and knowledge instead of skills. However, it is very important to place academic study in a practical, real-world context and encourage students to think critically. To do this, students must first understand and apply the information to a certain context, and then relate it and apply it to other contexts. For example, if a student knows that the Limpopo River acts as a border which separates SA from Zimbabwe, but also understands how it connects these two countries politically, then students can begin to understand rivers as a concept beyond just a natural phenomenon. This understanding can then be applied to other information and subjects all around the world. Meta-cognition Once a student can apply information in different contexts, they need to improve their understanding of how they learn. Meta-cognition involves giving students the capacity to be active in planning, monitoring, evaluating, and adjusting their own learning behaviours as they continue to learn. It involves two parts: meta-cognition knowledge — the students’ knowledge of their own cognitive abilities and strategies available for a specific task; and meta-cognition regulation — how the students monitor and control their cognitive process. For example, realising that the strategy they are using to solve a problem isn’t working and trying another one. Meta-cognitive strategies work together to allow students the ability to predict outcomes, improve their understanding, learn from failure, activate background knowledge, plan ahead, and apportion time and memory. These three big ideas of learning build on one another, transforming the student into an active learner with the capacity to deepen their knowledge, understand and apply it in different contexts, and monitor their learning all the way through school and into university. Universities are becoming more selective as the pool of applicants increases. By arming our students with these skills, we are not only helping them gain more desirable offers from universities — which is the major aim for most South African students and parents — but also preparing them with the skills they need to succeed at university and in life beyond. • Lee Davis, deputy director of professional development at Cambridge International Examinations