Sao Paulo — Brazil lost between $250m and $300m in meat export revenue earlier this year as about 46 countries — including SA, China and the European Union — closed their doors to its products in the face of a scandal surrounding the alleged sale of rotten meat. Brazil is the biggest exporter of beef in the world, the biggest exporter of chicken meat (4.4-million tons in 2016), and the fourth-biggest exporter of pork (732,000 tons). The scandal, which blew up in March, resulted from contraventions of safety and quality regulations, and the alleged bribing of inspectors by meat packers to overlook them. Brazilian meat exports fell 20% when the scandal first broke. Chicken meat exports slumped by 4.7% in the first six months of this year compared with last year and pork exports fell 3% over the same period. Local meat production declined by about 145,000 tons and the revenue of huge meat producers plummeted. Whereas exports could reach $93m on any one day, they fell on one day to $100,000. Plants closed and workers were laid off. Containers were stopped mid-ocean, and the imported meat was subjected to extensive tests, the costs of which had to be borne by Brazilian exporters. The industry — which insists that the meat had only expired and was not rotten (though expired meat is not accepted by most countries) — has taken five months to restore its reputation and exports have returned to their former levels. But exports have now become tougher to execute as the control regimes in the importing countries have become more rigorous — and more expensive. The Association of Brazilian Animal Protein (Abpa) — which represents the pork and poultry sectors, and which has been a key participant in the international marketing campaign to build the industries’ image — invited more than 50 journalists to its bi-annual congress for them to hear its side of the story, and the industries’ impressive export achievements. Abpa executive president Francisco Turra insisted the "rotten meat" story was false, and that what was at issue was a "weak flesh" story which had cast a shadow over Brazil. "The problem was a false generalisation of a false story which we have demolished bit by bit," he told journalists at a media briefing ahead of the conference — though he admitted there were cases of wrongdoing that had been identified. Abpa vice-president Ricardo Santin said steps had been taken to ensure transparency in how government and the private sector were addressing the problem. Currently there were only seven small countries representing 0.4% of Brazilian meat exports which had maintained their export ban. Only one of the four implicated exporting meat companies was still blocked from one or two markets and this month Brazil would break its export record of last year. "Transparency was the greatest weapon we had," Turra said. Agriculture, Livestock and Food Supply Minister Blairo Maggi said the government was working on a new and strengthened system of inspections. The aim of the reorganisation would also be to remove any opportunity of political interference in agricultural production.