Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba has reached an in-principle agreement with Parliament that the Treasury’s report on Eskom’s coal-supply agreements with Tegeta Exploration and Resources be adjusted and the legislature also factor in the outcomes of a forensic probe. Standing committee on public accounts (Scopa) chairman Themba Godi confirmed this to Business Day. He had previously said the committee considered the report in its possession, which Business Day has seen, to be the final version. The report before Scopa recommends, among other things, that the R659m prepayment Eskom made to Tegeta be deemed a loan and interest be calculated. It also recommends the amount be regarded as irregular expenditure. Gigaba had said the report sent to the committee was not complete and had been submitted as a final report in error. Godi said the committee had not received an updated report from the Treasury, but he would allow the report to be updated and welcomed a forensic report into the matter. "I spoke to the minister [and] he clarified that it was not necessarily a withdrawal [when Gigaba wrote to the committee saying the report had been marked as final in error]. They wanted to strengthen a few areas," Godi said. Scopa expected a forensic investigation to identify what had gone wrong with Eskom’s coal-supply agreements with the Gupta-owned Tegeta and outline where the power utility’s systems had failed, as well as who should shoulder blame and whether or not criminal cases could be pursued. "Forensic [investigations] take [things] a step further than your normal investigation because you can make a paper trail and attach actions to individuals [in order] to take disciplinary measures or take criminal action," Godi said. Mayihlome Tshwete, Gigaba’s spokesman, said the Treasury would appoint an investigator soon. "The investigation has been signed off and what is left is to appoint an investigator. "There aren’t necessarily timelines for forensic investigations because of the specialised nature of the process, but Parliament has agreed with us on the matter’s importance and the need to resolve it," he said. magubanek@businesslive.co.za