Shareholders, including Allan Gray, will be squaring up to take on Naspers chairman Koos Bekker over the company’s lax remuneration policy at Friday’s AGM, even as one analyst lamented that their objections to how Naspers’s executives are rewarded are "futile". Allan Gray portfolio manager Simon Raubenheimer said "we have voted against the remuneration policy for the past two years and haven’t seen any improvement". The crux of the issue is Naspers’ extraordinary good fortune in its Tencent investment – the source of this year’s 43% gain on the stock market and the single largest contributor to Naspers’ profit. Without Tencent — of which Naspers owns 34% and over which it has no managerial control — Naspers’s earnings have slumped from $298m in 2015 to a loss of $214m in the year to March. Video entertainment, for example, went from a profit of $732m in 2015 to just $287m in 2017. According to Naspers’s 2017 remuneration report, CEO Bob van Dijk, who joined Naspers in 2014, achieved 50 out of a maximum of 50 on "group financial results" under the company’s annual "performance-related incentive outcomes". "How does he get 50?" asks shareholder activist Theo Botha. "He’s got nothing to do with Tencent. He doesn’t even sit on the Tencent board. How can we give him a bonus?" Yet Van Dijk’s annual bonus almost doubled to $973,000 in 2017, and he scooped almost 148,000 N shares as part of his long-term incentive benefit. But such is Naspers’s share price discount to its investment in Tencent that the businesses it actually runs — principally e-commerce, Multichoice and Media 24 — are now worth a negative R1,300, according to one analyst. "That’s the fundamental thing," says Botha. "When [Naspers] gives shares away they’re at market value. But if I put the sum of the parts together, you’re actually getting this discount or free. Sort out the discount, don’t allow it to get worse, and if it does get worse, I’m sorry, then you’re sitting on your laurels. "Here’s a destruction of value and you’re relying on Tencent. [Van Dijk] had three years to do something: this is unacceptable." For Botha, improvement will only come if shareholders vote against Naspers’s remuneration policies as they stand. But according to one fund manager and shareholder, who asked not to be named, 75% of Naspers N shareholders, such as the Public Investment Corporation and ordinary retail investors, had abstained or voted against the remuneration policy in 2016 after a similar count of 60% in 2015. The problem is that the controlling shareholders, such as Bekker, are clearly happy with the status quo. "In calculating this we had to make one assumption: that 100% of A shareholders [the high voting shares] voted in favour of the policy," the fund manager said. Botha is also incensed that Naspers has proposed cutting its so-called long-term vesting period from five years to four, under resolution 10 in the AGM. "They’re not giving any explanations why. "A long-term scheme should actually be from five to 10 years. This is bulls**t. That’s not aligned to share holders, to our interests." talevig@timesmedia.co.za