Bengaluru — Gold was mostly steady on Friday amid weaker Asian stocks, with some investors gravitating towards safe-haven assets on political uncertainty in the US and after a van mowed through crowds in Barcelona, killing 13 people. Spot gold was nearly unchanged at $1,287.34/oz by 4.08am GMT, after climbing for two consecutive days. US gold futures for December delivery were flat at $1,293.10/oz. Asian stock investors joined a global retreat from riskier assets on Friday and the dollar wavered on growing doubts about US President Donald Trump’s ability to fulfil his economic agenda. Markets were further shaken as Spain mounted a sweeping anti-terrorist operation on Friday after a suspected Islamist militant drove a van into crowds in Barcelona, killing 13 people before fleeing. "Risk aversion is back on the table again.… Market-watchers basically ignored the better than expected US initial jobless claims, and digested the unexpected terrorist attack in Barcelona amid the growing controversy in the US-centric political space," OCBC analyst Barnabas Gan wrote in a note. There are increasing concerns around the Trump administration’s ability to push ahead with its policies following the disbandment of two high-profile business advisory councils over the president’s remarks on violence in Virginia. "The ongoing discord coming out of Washington could prove supportive for gold as well, as this could pressure the dollar further just as the Fed is casting fresh doubts about its rate timetable," INTL FCStone analyst Edward Meir said. Financial markets were warning of weakness in the US economy, so the Federal Reserve should be "very patient and judicious" as it considered whether to raise interest rates, Dallas Fed president Robert Kaplan said on Thursday. The dollar on Friday edged lower against the yen, while the euro was steady after dropping to a three-week low on Thursday after minutes of the European Central Bank’s (ECB’s) July 20 policy meeting showed policy makers were worried about a possible overshoot in the euro. Gold is sensitive to rising interest rates because they push up bond yields, increasing the opportunity cost of holding nonyielding bullion, and tend to strengthen the dollar, in which gold is priced. Spot gold faced resistance at $1,291/oz and it could hover below this level or retrace towards support at $1,271 again, Reuters technical analyst Wang Tao said. Among other precious metals, silver was down 0.4% at $16.92/oz, while platinum was up 0.7% at $978.80/oz. Palladium edged down 0.2% to $923.97, after hitting its highest since February 2001 at $930.00 in the previous session. Reuters