Public Enterprises Minister Lynne Brown’s personal assistant, Kim Davids, became the first person in government to fall as a result of disclosures in the Gupta e-mail leaks. But questions have been raised as to whether she was an easy target, considering that other senior officials in the Department of Public Enterprises including director-general Richard Seleke, were also implicated in the leaked e-mails. Suspicion was also raised about why she was not hauled before a disciplinary hearing under the provisions of the Labour Relations Act. On Wednesday, Brown said Davids had been asked to resign to protect the integrity of her (Brown’s) office. Parliament’s portfolio committee on public enterprises as well as the Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse (Outa) said they would have preferred to see Davids face a disciplinary inquiry to get to the bottom of her links to the Gupta family. Davids is said to have been hosted by the Guptas at the plush Oberoi hotel last December, at the same time as Mineral Resources Minister Mosebenzi Zwane and Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs Minister Des van Rooyen. Leaked Gupta e-mails showed a detailed invoice bearing her name was sent to the family to settle. The AmaBhungane and Scorpio investigative units also reported that Brown’s romantic partner, Ingrid Tufvesson, and her director-general have had links with the Gupta family. Davids declined to comment. In the past she has denied involvement with the Guptas. The chairwoman of the portfolio committee on public enterprises, Ellen Prins, said it was disturbing that Davids was not afforded an opportunity to present her side of the story in a disciplinary hearing, as the allegations were yet to be proven. She also took Brown to task, saying her reliance on the leaked e-mails in the firing of her personal assistant now meant she should take action when other disclosures come to light. “I think whoever thinks the leaks are genuine and takes a decision on it, will have to bear with that because every other leak that comes out, even if that leak speaks about her, she will have to agree that the leak is genuine,” Prins said. Outa chairman Wayne Duvenage said Brown offered Davids the “easy way out”. It was unclear on Wednesday night whether Davids had accepted the offer to resign. mahlakoanat@businesslive.co.za