Sydney — Ancient alchemists believed that gold was the noble metal: incapable of reacting with other minerals, it could exist only in its unsullied elemental form. Investors believe something similar about gold mining companies. Like the alchemists — who later discovered that the yellow metal could be turned into a variety of useful chemical compounds — they might be making a mistake. Of the top 20 producers globally, almost all are pure-play miners that are only really serious about producing gold itself. The exceptions — Freeport-McMoRan and Glencore — end up on the list simply because their copper mines also contain a few veins of the more valuable stuff, which they can sell to make a bit of cash on the side. That’s an exception to the general rule, which sees mining companies produce a spread of minerals. Put together a portfolio of iron ore, aluminium, coal and copper exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and you have a decent proxy for Rio Tinto. Swap the aluminium for nickel, and you’re looking at Vale; exchange it for platinum and diamonds, and you can mimic Anglo American. Switch it for a barrel of oil, and it’s BHP Billiton. Why should gold be different? Though a barbarous relic, it’s clearly consumed in substantial volumes. In terms of the value of global production, only coal and iron ore bring in more money to mining companies. Its popularity among Indian and Chinese jewellery buyers suggests it’s also highly leveraged to growth in emerging economies, in a way that’s been fashionable among major miners for well over a decade. One factor that applies to the largest miners is that most pure gold mines just aren’t big enough to move the needle. The dozen biggest pits each produce in the region of a million ounces a year, equivalent to almost $1.3bn of revenue at current prices. That sounds substantial, but the vast majority are far smaller. Given that you need to be turning over $10bn or so a year to join the first division of global mining companies, unless you can find one of those hen’s-tooth deposits it’s very unlikely to be worth the effort. Another reason has traditionally been the gold premium, which sees miners of the precious metal trade at higher valuations to their baser peers. A very rough version of this can be seen from comparing share prices to free cash flow: the top 20 gold miners trade on a multiple of about 21, while the top 20 diversified producers stand at about 15. In theory, that means a conventional producer could get a better shareholder return from selling on any deposits it finds to the pure-play businesses, instead of developing the pit itself. Top 20 gold miners’ share price to free cash flow ratio: 21 times Still, the rise of exchange-traded funds over the past decade or so has allowed gold fans to invest more or less directly in the metal itself, reducing those premiums to some extent. An investment of $100 in the SPDR Gold Shares ETF 10 years ago would be worth about $184 today. If it was placed on the New York Stock Exchange’s Gold BUGS Index of unhedged precious metal miners, it would be worth just $63. As Peter Bradford, CEO of small nickel-copper-gold miner Independence Group, told Bloomberg Television this week, all high-quality deposits should have a place in the portfolio of a decent mining business, regardless of which element they hold. In Australia’s oldest working gold town of Kalgoorlie, investors and geologists this week are gathering for the annual Diggers & Dealers conference. The mid-sized gold miners and the base-metal companies in attendance will mingle, but tend to keep themselves segregated when it comes to the dealing bit. That’s a shame. It may not be the fashion, but these days there are opportunities for gold miners to hedge their commodity exposures with a little base-metal alloy — and vice versa. Bloomberg