There is deep irony in the description by certain cabinet ministers who said in the recent parliamentary debate that the motion of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma was akin to a "back-door coup d’etat". This coup may have started a decade ago, when Zuma and his allies defeated Thabo Mbeki for the leadership of the ANC. It has crept upon SA in a series of deliberate moves to repurpose state institutions to serve rent-seeking networks that have set themselves up as a "shadow state" — an alternative to the constitutional one. It has been, in effect, a silent coup. This is the central argument of our report Betrayal of the Promise: How South Africa is Being Stolen. It arose out of the State Capacity Research Project and drew in academics from the universities of Cape Town, the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, Stellenbosch and a journalist. It was released before the leak of more than 200,000 e-mails from the accounts of members and associates of the Guptas, who set themselves up as key brokers in the networks that connect the shadow and constitutional states. At the time of the ANC’s Polokwane conference in 2007, Zuma was facing corruption charges and had been acquitted on a rape charge. Successfully portraying himself as "victim in chief", he managed to recruit a "coalition of the wounded" including Cosatu, the ANC Youth League and the South African Communist Party, which had grievances against Mbeki. The capture of state institutions goes further than for purposes of simple looting. Fundamentally, as the Betrayal of the Promise report says, these have been repurposed for "consolidating political power to ensure longer-term survival, the maintenance of a political coalition, and its validation by an ideology that masks private enrichment by reference to public benefit". While there has long been small-scale corruption, there was a sea change in its nature after 2012 — the Zuma-centred elite began to centralise rent-seeking and eliminate lower-order competition. This was manifest by the expulsion of then ANC Youth League leader Julius Malema from the party in the wake of, among other things, a graft scandal in Limpopo. The attempt to neutralise Malema came in the midst of a steady expansion of the state that began in 2009: government departments proliferated and the public service ballooned. Research by Dr Vinothan Naidoo of the University of Cape Town’s political studies department shows that from 2009, the number of departments and public entities had been spiking. It’s doubtful, he says, that this was due to a strategic assessment of policy. Rather it was "based on heightened patronage pressures exerted on Zuma following an acrimonious succession from Mbeki". Not only has the state grown, it has also steadily outsourced itself, procuring today about R500bn worth of goods and services from the private sector. So, access to government tenders has become an important source of enrichment. The Zuma elite has established five key levers of state control. The first was to control state-owned enterprises. A critical moment came in 2010, when Malusi Gigaba was made minister of public enterprises. The SOEs do not report to Parliament in the same detail as government departments, yet they control multibillion-rand procurement budgets. It was through the SOEs that the Gupta family rose from being bit players in a patronage network to key brokers in the larger project of state capture. The second lever was to establish parallel, weak and unaccountable governing structures, in the form of interministerial committees that are not accountable to Parliament. The third lever has been in the steady "capture" of the intelligence and law enforcement authorities by removing people seen as obstacles. This includes the Hawks, the National Prosecuting Authority and the police services. More pertinently for the economy, it has included the South African Revenue Service. Fourth, the state has become actively "rent-seeking". Cabinet ministers acting in concert with private interests use regulatory instruments to "shake down" incumbent businesses and favour particular interests. The fifth lever has been control over the Treasury. Gordhan and his deputy Mcebisi Jonas were obstacles to state capture. The Treasury’s lodestar was good governance, hence the establishment of the chief procurement officer in 2013. Moreover, the Treasury used the Financial Intelligence Centre, the only intelligence agency not controlled by the Zuma network, to track illicit financial flows in ways that exposed the shadow state. But even before Gordhan and Jonas were dismissed, the SOEs were used as fonts of enrichment for the Gupta brokers and the new power elite. Gigaba’s first move as public enterprises minister was to propose Iqbal Sharma, then a senior official in the Department of Trade and Industry, as Transnet board chairman. The Cabinet blocked this because he was a well-known Gupta associate. So, Gigaba oversaw the creation of a board subcommittee that supervised tenders worth more than R2.5bn, and Sharma was installed as chair. In 2011, Brian Molefe was appointed CEO of Transnet. In 2014, Transnet announced its biggest tender yet to a consortium that included China South Rail for the supply of more than 1,000 locomotives. A few weeks before that, the Guptas, with Zuma’s son Duduzane, had bought a stake in VR Laser, a Gauteng firm that produces steel plate components. A stipulation of the deal was that successful bidders use local firms to supply components and it was not a coincidence that each company in the winning consortium visited VR Laser. At the same time, Gupta-linked financial firm Trillian benefited from providing (supposedly) financial and structuring advice. The contract was originally awarded to a McKinsey-led consortium in 2012 and payment was capped at R35.2m, but Transnet revoked the contracts with McKinsey’s minor parties and awarded a R10m share to Regiment, of which Eric Wood was a director. Wood was later to emerge as a key Gupta ally. Driven by Transnet’s chief financial officer Anoj Singh, the price and scope of the contract ballooned and McKinsey’s role was minimised. Wood tried, unsuccessfully, to buy a majority stake in Regiment. It was then that Trillian emerged as a player when another investment firm, Lipshell, became the majority shareholder. Lipshell’s sole director was Salim Essa, also a Gupta associate. Transnet paid Trillian R93.5m for acting as a "lead arranger" in a loan by a consortium of four banks and, a few months later, when Wood joined the firm, it transferred its entire contract to Trillian, which also landed key contracts with Eskom. The political project that has centralised rent-seeking has taken place against the backdrop of an economy that has grown falteringly. The ideological tropes of "radical economic transformation" and "white monopoly capital" have been used to play on economic shortcomings and mask the intentions of the new power elite. A more dangerous straw man that has been created is the Constitution — described, even by the president, as an obstacle to "transformation". Inclusive economic growth has eluded the country and inequality, driven by high unemployment and poor public education, has risen. But the solutions to these problems won’t be found in the "shadow state". We need to re-establish an atmosphere of trust based on the rule of law and the Constitution to broker a new inclusive economic deal. This won’t happen until the shadow state is dismantled and the key perpetrators of state capture are brought to justice. • Bhorat and Swilling are professors at the universities of Cape Town and Stellenbosch respectively and co-authors of Betrayal of the Promise: How South Africa is Being Stolen.