Seven ANC MPs, some of whom support President Jacob Zuma and some of whom oppose him, are facing disciplinary action over their conduct, all linked to last week’s motion of no confidence in Parliament. The ANC defeated the motion but about 34 party MPs voted in favour of Zuma’s removal. The fallout from MPs bucking the party line continued this week. Four MPs would be referred to the ANC’s caucus disciplinary committee, party chief whip Jackson Mthembu announced on Tuesday, for their boycott of a meeting of the portfolio committee that was meant to grill Public Service and Administration Minister Faith Muthambi over allegations of nepotism and that she misspent taxpayers’ money by flying 30 family members and friends to Cape Town to attend her budget vote. In a letter to Mthembu, the MPs said they did not want to attend meetings presided over by Zuma critic Makhosi Khoza as they believed she had violated the ANC’s constitution. They asked that all meetings be suspended until their complaints against her were "addressed". Khoza has been open about how she voted in last week’s motion and has come under fire for it from Zuma allies. At least three MPs who are known to have voted against Zuma last week would face disciplinary processes, secretary-general Gwede Mantashe said on Tuesday. The party would not embark on a "witch-hunt" to determine who among its own MPs voted against Zuma, he said, but would act against those who came out publicly about their positions. This was the decision taken at an ANC national working committee meeting on Monday. Khoza, Derek Hanekom and Pravin Gordhan had said they would vote with their conscience. The absent committee members took exception to her public position on the vote of no confidence, Khoza said. "I don’t want to go into that [vote of no confidence], but it does [have to do with why they are not here], judging by messages I’ve received on Whatsapp from the members who said that they would not work with a chair who chooses to follow her conscience," she said. Aside from answering accusations of nepotism, Muthambi had missed the opportunity, Khoza said, to reassure the committee that she was on top of the budget shortfall crisis that bedevilled her department and its entities. "This department sets norms and standards for the public service. Given the state of governance in most of these entities, it is tragic that she is not here. One would have expected that she made an effort to be here because one must be exemplary," she said.