Isn’t it tiresome how history relentlessly repeats itself? During apartheid, racists believed blacks were only capable of being "hewers of wood and drawers of water". Postapartheid, the neoracists believe all whites are abusive, exploitative and, ironically, racist. The truth is we’re all — black, white and a few shades in between — utterly human, replete with the worst and best characteristics, and the only difference between all of us is opportunity. During apartheid, lack of opportunity held back blacks and opportunity in the form of power gave racist whites the wherewithal to be exploitative and abusive. Robert Mugabe, who is a black Eugene Terre’blanche, epitomises this. This long preamble is necessary because I’m white and I’m going to deal with the touchy issue of farm worker evictions, which means I’m handicapped before I even begin. The assumption will be that I’m racist. The Extension of Security of Tenure Act is a laudable piece of legislation designed to protect handicapped and elderly farm workers who have spent many years working for farmers from being thrown onto the street. Regrettably, a whole industry of bottom feeders with a variety of vested interests has mushroomed around this issue. They range from unscrupulous nongovernmental organisations (NGOs) and lawyers to opportunistic politicians. There are, of course, some heartbreaking illegal evictions, but in most cases — contrary to Lauren Royston’s and Nokuthula Mthimunye’s article (Laws exist to protect farm workers, but on paper only, August 4), farm workers are well-protected by an efficient and extremely sympathetic legal system, taxpayer-funded free legal advice and NGOs working tirelessly on their behalf. I’m also willing to bet that, with an active trade union, harsh legal penalties and many supportive NGOs, illegal farm worker evictions are few and far between. The first myth that needs to be shattered is that farmers are wealthy. Most farmers are deeply indebted, with the total estimated at a record R160bn, and returns at best reaching 6% in a good season, according to Agricultural Business Chamber data. With the best will in the world, farmers cannot afford to provide free housing for generations of farm tenants, their wives, former wives, children and grandchildren who have never worked for them. But that is precisely what is happening. To evict farm tenants legally is a long and expensive business and most farmers don’t have the resources. If Pick n Pay had to house not only their workers and former employees over the age of 60, but also their wives, former wives, children and grandchildren who work elsewhere, they would undoubtedly be insolvent in a short space of time. But this is what farmers, very often living on the breadline themselves, are expected to do. Our experience of evicting farm tenants in Robertson is the absolute antithesis of the headline, "Laws exist to protect farm workers, but on paper only". A section of our small 12ha farm with a three-bedroomed cottage and small garden has in effect been expropriated without any form of compensation. Eight years ago, when we bought the farm, tenants Fienie and Nora September and their three children lived in the cottage. Fienie worked for a neighbouring farmer but within three years, had been fired and divorced his wife. He moved off the farm and found alternative accommodation without any problem whatsoever. We felt sorry for Nora, who worked as a domestic worker for a neighbouring farmer, and allowed her to live rent-free for about a year before charging her a nominal rental of R200 a month. In addition, we spent R15,000 fixing up her house, including putting in a solar geyser. At this point, Nora’s eldest son William, who had a well-paid job as manager of the Rosendal Spa, did some part-time work for us in the garden. We paid him for watering a few of our trees. He didn’t water them and the trees died or were stunted. From there, things went from bad to worse. In addition to other appalling behaviour, the Septembers put up a pigsty without our permission. It was erected far from their cottage on the road leading to our self-catering cottages and the pigs were underfed, which upset our paying guests. The Septembers refused to remove it. Against our explicit wishes and local planning laws, they erected a corrugated iron structure to house a bicycle rental business and William’s new R120,000 car. We offered to house the bicycles in our workshop, but this was refused. The relationship broke down irretrievably, they refused to move out and we started the eviction process. In the interim, William was able to get alternative accommodation without any problem and moved out. The remaining September family had access to taxpayer-funded legal aid and were represented in the magistrate’s courts by an advocate. We had a mere lawyer. For various reasons, the case went on appeal, with the Septembers being represented by a high-flying advocate. Two years and R80,000 later, Judge AJP Meer, in the Land Claims Court, found against us. Nora, now in her late 40s, the former wife of a husband who worked for the previous farmer, and her two children, who have lived on our farm for 12 years, have been given the right to live rent-free in our cottage for the rest of their lives. Currently, our situation is this. We had to move from Pretoria because work opportunities had dried up. We cannot possibly afford to retire and we cannot live on the income generated by the holiday letting of two cottages and an annual R15,000 to R20,000 profit on our grapes. We had intended to renovate Nora’s house for our own use and generate desperately needed additional income by opening a shop on the property, which is the only suitable place to put a shop. Not only do bylaws prevent us from building new structures, but using and expanding the house would have been far cheaper, with existing services and garden. The potential loss of income from not having a shop is devastating. Nora has turned down our offer of R40,000 (house prices start at R55,000) and will only move if we buy her a R320,000 house. We have also been harassed by the Septembers’ lawyer, who wants us to maintain the house, despite the fact that Nora doesn’t pay rent, and to install a new Eskom connection at an estimated cost of R200,000. Nora’s former husband and her son found accommodation without any problems, but Meer decided that if Nora was evicted, she would be homeless. There is a huge backlog of reconstruction and development programme (RDP) housing, so Nora won’t get a free house, but there are two-bedroom RDP houses available for rental at R1,500 a month. Despite the fact that Robertson is booming and there is a crying need for cleaners for guest houses in the area, Nora has chosen to work only three days a week. If she worked five days a week, together with her son’s income, she would be able to afford the rental accommodation with ease. • Sussens is a former communications adviser from Pretoria who is trying to eke out a living on a small farm in Robertson.