MTN shareholders will still receive a final dividend — albeit half the previous year’s — despite the cellphone network operator booking numerous losses, including its full R10.5bn Nigerian regulatory fine that it has to repay over three years. On March 13, a new management team under incoming CEO Rob Shuter takes over the reins at MTN. Ralph Mupita will be joining MTN on April 3 as chief financial officer. As is customary before a corporate leadership change, the last results under the old management appear to have been painted in an as unflattering light as possible so as to create a low base for a promised turnaround. Numerous deductions saw MTN plunge into a R3.1bn loss for the year to end-December from the previous year’s R23.6bn profit. That this loss was mainly due to accounting is indicated by MTN declaring a R4.50 final dividend, taking its full dividend for 2016 to R7 — nearly half the previous year’s R13.10. Costs MTN incurred in Nigeria included R1.3bn "professional fees" to reduce its fine and R530m for a marketing campaign called "Project Winback" to regain subscribers it was forced to cut off for failing to identify themselves. MTN also had to pay R1bn to subscribers of its empowerment scheme Zakhele Futhi who wanted to exit when the lock-in period expired. Its foreign exchange losses widened to R6bn from R1.4bn. Revenue was nearly flat at R147.92bn from the previous year’s R147.06bn. Nigeria accounted for 32% and SA for 28% of the group’s total revenue. The Nigerian government’s drive to force cellphone companies to cut off unidentified subscribers in its drive to curb Boko Haram led to a 9% drop in MTN’s Nigerian revenue while its South African revenue grew 5%. "In the year, we appointed a number of new senior executives with the requisite skills to take MTN into a new growth phase. We also reinstated the regional vice-president positions to ensure an extra layer of regional, operational and governance oversight," the company said in its results statement. "These appointments position the group to capitalise on its many prospects and reach its full potential in a rapidly transforming and exciting sector. "