The Stormers will go into this weekend’s Super Rugby clash against the Cheetahs without wing Seabelo Senatla‚ prop Wilco Louw and flank Rynhardt Elstadt after they suffered foot‚ sternum and ankle injuries, respectively, writes Craig Ray. Lock JD Schickerling was concussed during the 44-31 win against the Sunwolves in Singapore and has also been ruled out, although he was unlikely to feature anyway with the return of Boks Pieter-Steph du Toit and Eben Etzebeth. Coach Robbie Fleck ruled the quartet out of this weekend’s match but would not commit to a time frame for Senatla and Elstadt’s return. The players were still having scans in hospital on Monday after the long journey from the Far East. Louw has a sternum injury and the long-term prognosis is still unclear. Senatla was superb in his first start for the Stormers this season‚ and even though he sustained the injury in the first half‚ he played until the hour mark. Elstadt was helped off the field midway through the second half and despite initial fears that his injury was serious‚ Fleck said there was more optimism 48 hours later. "On the positive side we have fullback SP Marais‚ scrumhalf Jano Vermaak and wing Cheslin Kolbe back in the frame for selection this week‚" Fleck said. "Seabelo was very good and played through his injury. In broken play he was deadly and showed great pace but there are certain things he still needs to work on. "We will continue to work on those with him‚ but overall he was good and showed glimpses of what he can do," Fleck said. "He’s a natural talent and we’re happy to have him in the squad, but once again it’s an untimely injury for him and for the team. "We have seven or eight players out among the backs and for the first time we have been hit with injuries in the forwards. So our depth is being tested, but it’s giving youngsters a chance." The Bulls face a daunting date with the Chiefs in Hamilton on Saturday as coach Nollis Marais looks for answers to his side’s dismal defending and poor attack. Their only win so far has been an unconvincing victory over the Sunwolves at Loftus. Adding to the Bulls’ problems was Monday’s news that tighthead prop John-Roy Jenkinson would be returning home with a hamstring injury. Jenkinson had just returned from injury and made his debut in the defeat to the Blues last Saturday. Jacobie Adriaanse is likely to fill the void in the short term and no replacement has been called up. TMG Digital