The undisputed schoolboy star of 2016, Damian Willemse, is set for his Super Rugby debut this weekend after being named on the Stormers bench for their match against the Southern Kings in Port Elizabeth. Willemse‚ 18‚ who was at Paul Roos, Stellenbosch, and was the South African Schools flyhalf that beat England‚ Wales and France in 2016‚ will earn his chance after injury ruled out Jean-Luc du Plessis. Robert du Preez will start at flyhalf‚ paving the way for Willemse’s debut. Coach Robbie Fleck‚ who has never been afraid to select young players‚ had no qualms about picking Willemse. Fleck also named flyhalf Kurt Coleman on the bench suggesting Willemse’s role will not be as a pivot‚ but rather a centre. "Damian played in the pre-season and was impressive. He is a player to watch‚" Fleck said. He made six changes to the starting lineup after last week’s 32-25 win over the Jaguares at Newlands with regular captain Siya Kolisi rested and lock Eben Etzebeth leading the Stormers for the first time. On the bench there are also possible debuts for loose forward Jaco Coetzee and scrumhalf Justin Phillips. "Most of the changes are injury enforced‚ with only Siya [Kolisi] and Seabelo Senatla [wing] rested‚" Fleck said. "Wing Bjorn Basson gives us experience in a young back line and bench. He has trained well after being a late addition." Kings coach Deon Davids made five changes and a positional switch from the team that beat the Sunwolves 37-23 in Singapore last week. Following a spate of injuries at lock‚ Irne Herbst is fit for the Cape derby after recovering from concussion. The Kings will also begin the match with a new flank combination‚ as opensider Chris Cloete and blindside Thembelani Bholi make their first starts of the season. Scrumhalf Ricky Schroeder will make his Super Rugby debut after Louis Schreuder (concussion) and Rudi van Rooyen (ankle) were injured in Singapore last week. Centre Luzuko Vulindlu‚ who came off the bench in the first two matches of the season‚ will start this weekend in a rotational change that sees Berton Klaasen moving to the bench. The upside of winning in a difficult place such as Canberra means the Sharks can afford to keep an unchanged lineup for their clash against the Waratahs at King’s Park on Saturday. Sharks coach Robert du Preez knows it is a luxury they will not enjoy very often. "The Lions are a good side and I don’t think the Waratahs were great at Ellis Park‚" Du Preez said. "But I’m not too sure any team would have been great at 3pm in the Highveld heat. "They certainly will be targeting this game." Sharks captain Pat Lambie hopes his forwards will be able to step up as they did in Canberra after their chastening experience in Brisbane‚ where they lost their season-opener against the Reds. While the Sharks were expected to win at least one of their two matches‚ it was their never-say-die attitude that saw Lukhanyo Am score the winning try with the last move of the match. The players credited Lambie for playing on when the draw was on offer but Lambie was quick to deflect that praise. "There was a big focus in the week leading up to the Brumbies game that we play right up to the death. "We wanted to finish the tour on a good note. To play right until the death and score the try was amazing‚" Lambie said. The Lions will be hard-pressed to avenge 2016’s away defeat to the Jaguares. The Jaguares game comes at the best time for the Lions‚ early in the season where they can put aside the daunting trans-Atlantic trip and see whether they can collect points in Buenos Aires on Saturday night. It was not the case in 2016 and it had far-reaching consequences in the playoffs as they were second on the overall log and had to travel to Wellington for a final they would lose. Johan Ackermann’s side can afford to drop points against an improving Jaguares side that dealt with the Southern Kings and lost to the Stormers. That Ackermann left out some of his Springboks is a sign he has written off the game unless his second-string tourists conjure up a win. Ackermann made nine changes from the side that mauled the Waratahs. Lock Marvin Orie will make his debut alongside flyhalf Shaun Reynolds, while Johannes Jonker will make his run-on debut. Harold Vorster moves from 13 to 12 in Rohan Janse van Rensburg’s absence. TMG Digital