The recklessness of President Jacob Zuma is astounding. It&rsquo;s difficult to think of a more damaging way to signal to investors that the country is in political trouble than to derail an investor road show midstream, except of course by firing the minister outright.It looks like that is what comes next.All day, ANN7 and the pro-Zuma, pro-Gupta paid Twitter battalion have been pumping out the propaganda. On Monday alone, not only was Gordhan "recalled" from the UK (a term used by the ANC to demonstrate a complete loss of confidence), but he has also been blamed by Bathabile Dlamini for the grants crisis; by Nomvula Mokonyane for problems with water; for undermining SARS by leaking information about Tom Moyane and, for blocking Denel&rsquo;s dubious joint venture with a Gupta-associated company.By "recalling" Gordhan amid allegations of "gross insubordination" (not officially but through social media channels) in such a high-profile and highly televised manner, the Zuma-Gupta axis are doing what they seem to do so naturally: manufacturing a crisis and an imaginary enemy. First, it was White Monopoly Capitalism; then it was the banks and now, it is Pravin Gordhan.Those of our readers who don&rsquo;t regularly follow ANN7 or various Twitter accounts have perhaps been spared the vitriol that has been spewed out against Gordhan in the past week. ANN7 has accused him of "stealing" R10m from a pension fund; he has been identified with collusion of the banks on the false claim that he holds their shares; and fake intelligence reports have done the rounds, claiming his trip to the UK and US was all a plan to turn foreign banks against Zuma. It is all so far-fetched and nonsensical, without a shred of evidence that it is hard not to wonder why anyone would take it seriously at all. But dismiss it at your peril as it serves a direct political purpose: the idea is to create a narrative to justify the removal of Gordhan that the faction can use in the internal battle within the ANC, ostensibly to persuade branches and delegates to continue their backing of Zuma, along with what has become the customary payment to vote in a particular way.Twice in 2016, Zuma went to similar lengths to create such a climate and twice he has been cowed and forced to back down. In May, there were media reports that Gordhan was to be arrested for "espionage" related to the SARS special investigating unit, with the Hawks saying ominously that their investigation was still active. In November, he was asked to give a warning statement, in a massive televised show, put on by the National Prosecuting Authority.On both occasions, just like it was with the firing of Nhlanhla Nene in December 2015, Zuma was forced to back down after a massive internal, public and market backlash against him. This time, he s not likely to be put off so easily. While Zuma himself will realise the dangers of over-reaching his powers in the internal dynamics of the ANC for instance, the ANC caucus in Parliament is already turning against him his backers care a lot less about the political fallout. They want Gordhan gone, not only because today is the start of his court application for an order to prohibit political interference in the banks, but also for the many, many deals they want to get done before the end of his presidency.It is a terribly dangerous time for SA. While Zuma can t back down this time, the consequences of firing Gordhan (and several others in the Cabinet who he also wants to get rid off) will be dramatic and enormous for the ANC and will reverberate through all our political institutions. The damage could be such that the ANC may not survive it intact. While that may not be a bad thing in the long run for democracy, in the short run, it could mean a paralysing political crisis.