Hamilton — The third Test between New Zealand and SA at Seddon Park on Saturday could become the "match of the men who were not there". Fast bowler Tim Southee is the latest withdrawal‚ having been ruled out with a torn hamstring on Thursday. He joins batsman Ross Taylor‚ who was removed from the squad after tearing a calf muscle in the first Test. The Kiwi pair could be joined by left-arm fast bowler Trent Boult‚ who missed the second Test with a vaguely described "upper leg injury" and has yet to be passed fit for Saturday. Not that the South Africans don’t have their problems. Quinton de Kock injured a tendon in his right index finger in Wellington and will need to play with specially moulded padding or not at all. Should he be ruled out — the prospects of that happening seemed more probable than possible on Thursday — Heinrich Klaasen will make his debut. "We had an X-ray done to exclude a fracture and thankfully that was clear‚" said team manager Mohammed Moosajee. "He still complained of pain and discomfort in the finger so we had a scan done in Hamilton on Wednesday which revealed tendon damage to the last digit of the index finger. "We will make a late call on his availability on Friday after he undergoes a fitness test with protective strapping to see if he will be able to bat or keep wicket," he said. "Either way‚ he is going to need a protracted period of recovery which will take between four to six weeks." That will hit the headlines in India‚ where De Kock is expected to report for duty with the Delhi Daredevils early in April. "There is every likelihood of him missing out on the IPL [Indian Premier League] because of the expected recovery time‚" Moosajee said. Minutes before Moosajee spoke‚ Vernon Philander held his own media conference with his left ankle strapped. "There’s been no issues yet‚" he said about a continuing issue that was flagged before SA came on tour. "Hopefully I can go for another six months." What with Morné Morkel freshly returned to fitness from a bulging disc‚ Dale Steyn still recovering from a broken shoulder and Kagiso Rabada looking more in need of a rest with every spell he bowls‚ Philander’s presence is vital for SA in a year that includes Test series against England and India and‚ early in 2018‚ Australia. On Thursday, the Seddon Park pitch had been shorn and is being billed as a surface that will offer turn and take the sting out of fast bowling. But Philander took match figures of 10/114 to help SA win by nine wickets in three days at this ground in 2012. The visitors‚ who triumphed by eight wickets with two days to spare in Wellington to take a 1-0 lead into the last Test‚ will bank on Philander to do something similar. SA are favourites going into Saturday’s game, but the weather could get in the way, with rain forecast for all five days of the match. TMG Digital