Tourism authorities in the scenic town of Franschhoek are worried that the drought could hamper their thriving operations. The town, which is nestled between mountains in the Cape winelands, is regarded as the food and wine capital of the region. At present, not even the water shortage has led to a decrease in visitor numbers. Franschhoek’s tourism sector growth has largely been driven by events and its renowned wine farms that attract domestic and international wine enthusiasts. "The drought could have an impact just as it would affect other sectors," said Reinher Behrens, the recently appointed CEO of the Franschhoek Wine Valley Tourism Authority. "We are in the same boat as everybody else in the Western Cape … all the establishments are aware of the water restrictions … whether we have seen a decline in tourist numbers? The answer is no," he said. However, there are fears that if the drought persists, tourists could avoid visiting the region. Behrens said events and wine tourism had driven up visitor numbers in recent years. In 2016, about 6,000 people attended the town’s Bastille Festival, up from about 5,400 the previous year. Visitors to the Franschhoek Summer Wines increased from 852 in 2016 to almost 1,000 in 2017. "Wine tourism has lot to do with what your tourist wants … what makes us unique is that we have the wine tram, which runs from town and takes you to three of four wineries and farms … part of that trip takes you through to the vineyards and this gives you a fantastic experience of the farms as well as the wine-making [process]." He said going forward the tourism authority would also focus on adventure tourism. "We will develop mountain biking, develop new trails … we have new restaurants coming in and wineries, which makes it an interesting destination." Weddings were also a major contributor to the tourism sector in the town. "Weddings are big in the Western Cape … we do know that some of these farms have beautiful chapels and banquet facilities used for weddings. It has become a big market." Behrens said. "My biggest challenge is not to become complacent. The town is pumping … we have tourists who come to us on Friday night and we are fully booked … but we cannot rest on our laurels." Franschhoek’s economy mainly centres on the hospitality, wine and the agricultural sector The town has a population of about 17,000, and most of the residents are employed in hospitality and the agri-culture sector.