SA’s banking system was highly concentrated but the Reserve Bank was in favour of this as it provided financial stability, Registrar of Banks and Deputy Reserve Bank governor Kuben Naidoo said Wednesday. The Reserve Bank took steps to mitigate the risks of this concentration especially the potential adverse effects on competition, he said. Naidoo made a presentation during public hearings by Parliament’s finance and trade and industry committees on the transformation of the financial services sector. One round of hearings has already taken place and a third round is scheduled for May 3. SA’s six largest banks — Nedbank, Absa, Standard Bank, First National Bank, Investec and Capitec — represent more than 91% of the total banking sector. The growth of Capitec over a short period and its aggressive pricing policies had helped introduce more competition into the market, Naidoo noted. He stressed that there was a conflict between stability and market concentration but the bank favoured stability and took measures to mitigate the risks of concentration by imposing rigorous licence conditions. The creation of a dedicated market conduct regulator under the twin peaks model of financial regulation would strengthen the regulation of market conduct. Naidoo observed that there were significant advantages to having a few, well capitalised banks that were more resilient to crises and shocks than smaller banks. This entailed less risk but also risked including less competition, the dilemma of the big banks being "too big to fail" and contagion. Naidoo said the Reserve Bank had multiple objectives in regulating the banking sector, namely financial inclusion and access, competition, financial stability and transformation. He noted that there was a marked increase in concentration in the banking sector between 1998 and 2002 when 22 small and medium-sized banks left the sector. This was due to a number of factors, including the Asian crisis, depreciation of the rand, bad management and takeover by larger banks. Saambou was the largest bank failure at the time. In 1994 there were 35 registered banks but only 16 in 2016. Naidoo noted that there was a global trend towards the consolidation of banking institutions. Three new provisional banking licences were granted by the Reserve Bank in 2016, including to Discovery and Post Bank, which have 12 months to apply for a formal banking licences.