The country on Friday woke up to a new finance minister after President Jacob Zuma effected a far-reaching Cabinet reshuffle, with Malusi Gigaba replacing Pravin Gordhan. ANC MP Sfiso Buthelezi replaces Mcebisi Jonas as deputy finance minister. The rand weakened by 3%, from R12.80 to R13.35 when the news broke. It could weaken further when the news sinks in on Friday morning. The move follows a meeting of the ANC’s top six on Thursday night at which Zuma informed them of his decision. Gordhan’s removal is set to have far-reaching consequences for Zuma and the ANC. Gigaba is seen as a close ally of the president and is among his loyalists in the current Cabinet. But there was not much detail as the Presidency made the special announcement late on Thursday night. Zuma stepped back from his initial pick for finance minister at the request of his top five colleagues in the ANC — his initial choice was former Eskom boss Brian Molefe. Gordhan had not been told late last night that he had been replaced. The party’s top leaders were summoned to see Zuma at his residence in Pretoria late on Thursday after he informed them that he was intent on removing Gordhan and Jonas. At an earlier tense meeting of the top six officials on Monday, Zuma faced an open revolt from Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, secretary-general Gwede Mantashe and treasurer-general Zweli Mkhize. The party’s top leaders agreed that Zuma should report back to them next Monday, after they disagreed with his selection of Molefe. They had also told Zuma that a reshuffle would have to be more widespread as there were poor performing ministers in the Cabinet who had to be shifted. Zuma had delayed his planned reshuffle for three days, but his move on Thursday night could be taken as an indication that he had made a decision on the various objections raised. Zuma effected the move despite pressure piling up on him. The far-reaching reshuffle has affected strategic portfolios in the Cabinet including energy and communications. The new energy minister is Mmamoloko Kubayi, transport is Joe Masganyi, police minister is Fikile Mbalula, public works is Nathi Nhleko, public service and administration is Faith Muthambi, communications is Ayanda Dlodlo, home affairs is Hlengiwe Mkhize. The new deputy finance minister, Buthelezi, is an economist who attained his BCom degree while on Robben Island. Since being sworn in as an MP‚ he has served on the standing committee on finance. He was the founding chairman of the National Gambling Board in 1999 and previously worked as Zuma’s adviser when Zuma was economic development MEC in KwaZulu-Natal between 1994 and 1999. New ministers: 1. Minister of energy, Mmamoloko “Nkhensani” Kubayi 2. Minister of transport, Joe Maswanganyi 3. Minister of finance, Malusi Gigaba 4. Minister of police, Fikile Mbalula 5. Minister of public works, Nathi Nhleko, 6. Minister of sports and recreation, Thembelani Nxesi 7. Minister of tourism, Tokozile Xasa 8. Minister of public service and administration, Ms Faith Muthambi 9. Minister of home affairs, Hlengiwe Mkhize 10. Minister of communications, Ayanda Dlodlo Deputy ministers 1. Deputy minister of public service and administration, Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba 2. Deputy minister of finance, Sfiso Buthelezi 3. Deputy minister of public enterprises, Ben Martins 4. Deputy minister of arts and culture, Maggie Sotyu 5. Deputy minister of trade and industry, Gratitude Magwanishe 6. Deputy minister of communications, Thandi Mahambehlala, 7. Deputy minister of tourism, Elizabeth Thabethe 8. Deputy minister of police, Bongani Mkongi 9. Deputy minister of telecommunications and postal Services, Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams 10. Deputy minister of small business development, Nomathemba November. The South African Communist Party (SACP) confirmed earlier on Thursday that the president had used a document claiming to emanate from international intelligence to justify his recall of Gordhan from an international investor road show and to motivate  the reshuffle. SACP second deputy general secretary Solly Mapaila said his party had disagreed with Zuma. Mapaila described the use of the so-called intelligence report as "pathetic". "We should not be treated like children. Really?" he said. Former finance minister Nhlanhla Nene was fired in December 2015, also on the strength of a bogus intelligence dossier called "Project Spider Web". This cost the country more than R89bn. Mapaila said: "A developing country like ours cannot afford to lose more than R89bn in the period of a month…. If people take decisions that cause this, they must be held accountable for their actions," Mapaila said. The EFF has approached the Constitutional Court, seeking Zuma’s removal from office. The Concourt left it to Parliament to act on Zuma’s use of state funds to improve his Nkandla home. The EFF also wants the Constitutional Court to direct the National Assembly to put processes and mechanisms in place to hold Zuma accountable, and order it to establish a committee in Parliament or any other independent mechanism to conduct an investigation into the president’s conduct. The Congress of the People and the United Democratic Movement have joined the EFF’s motion. Newly formed labour federation the South African Federation of Trade Unions held a crisis meeting this week and decided to "occupy" the National Treasury should Gordhan and his team be removed. The DA said on Thursday it would table another motion of no confidence in Zuma. EFF leader Julius Malema said in his affidavit it had been six months since the Constitutional Court’s scathing Nkandla judgment against Zuma and yet the National Assembly had not held him accountable. "He has not been asked to explain his violations of the Constitution, which are self-evidently of a serious nature. "He has also not been taken to task in relation to the statements he made to Parliament before the judgment of the Constitutional Court, where he sought to falsely justify himself by misrepresenting the findings and report of the public protector and by the inaccurate portrayal of the role played by the state in the funding of the upgrades to his home."