South African Airways (SAA) pilots and the Organisation for Undoing Tax Abuse (Outa) said on Wednesday that their legal bid to remove chairperson Dudu Myeni could lead to her being permanently barred from holding senior positions in companies in SA. SAA Pilots Association (Saapa) chairperson Jimmy Conroy said pilots had opted to "stand on principle", though their legal challenge seeking to declare Myeni a delinquent director might not be won before she left the carrier, involuntarily or voluntarily. The pilots were acting on what they saw as a culture of gross lack of direct accountability within state-owned entities, Jimmy Conroy said on Wednesday. Saapa and Outa lodged court papers on Tuesday citing five contracts and deals under Myeni’s tenure that breached the Company’s Act, and resulted in "harm to the carrier either by intent or through gross negligence," Outa portfolio director Ben Theron said during a briefing in Johannesburg. Parties would be seeking a court order declaring that Myeni should not be eligible to serve on any board or in senior management for a period of at least seven years, but possibly permanently. Contracts and issues included in the legal challenge, which were to be served on SAA and Myeni on Wednesday, include a 2015 attempt to reconfigure a deal between the airline and Airbus. Myeni had been accused of misrepresenting the specifics deal to lease 10 aircraft from Airbus to then finance minister Nhlanhla Nene, allegations she has denied. The parties are, however, citing as their main argument an ill-fated 2016 deal with "boutique" financier BnP Capital. Outa legally challenged the deal for BnP to restructure the carrier’s R15bn in debt and the deal was cancelled, but BnP had subsequently sought R49.9m in penalties. Outa and Sapaa maintain Myeni, despite advice from SAA’s audit and risk committee, had pushed for this to be paid. "Only Myeni voted in favour of the resolution", Theron said, but the broader challenge was to paint the carrier as a "company seemingly at war at itself". The parties are citing multiple violations of the Company’s Act in all five instances, including that Myeni allegedly failed "to take effective and appropriate steps to manage the available working capital efficiently and economically", the parties’ court papers read. Sapaa, representing the vast majority of SAA pilots, had voted to pursue the legal challenge and did expect blowback from within the airline, Conroy said. SAA was in distress as a direct result of dysfunctional leadership, and pilots — who voted 522 to 66 — believed precedent needed to be set on accountable management, he said. "Our national carrier is quickly reaching the tipping point where its very survival is in question," he said.