Multiple national mountain bike champion Robyn de Groot is squaring up for a mighty battle at the Absa Cape Epic as she bids for a rare South African victory. De Groot will be riding with veteran German Sabine Spitz (Team Ascendis Health), a former Olympic gold, silver and bronze medallist with a formidable record over the years. The 44-year-old Spitz raced her first Cape Epic in 2016, finishing second overall with Ukrainian Yana Belomoina. "The women’s field for 2017 offers great depth, riders of class and some really strong partnerships, so I have no doubt the race is going to be very exciting," said De Groot. "After finishing second in my first Cape Epic in 2016, I wouldn’t be going for third place," laughed Spitz. "So the overall win will be the goal for this year, but it is a long race and a lot of things can happen." In 2016 the South African rode with Sweden’s Jennie Stenerhag and they were early leaders before the latter had to pull out of the event because of ill health. Stenerhag has teamed up with Switzerland’s Esther Suss (Meerendal CBC) in 2017, but the major threat to De Groot and Spitz should come from defending champion Ariane Lüthi of Switzerland and her new partner, Germany’s Adelheid Morath (Spur). Lüthi has won the event for the past three years with Denmark’s Annika Langvad, who is unavailable this year due to study commitments. In recent years the Cape Epic has placed a special emphasis on growing the women’s race and offers the same prize purse as the men. Besides De Groot, South African interest will focus on local youngster and rising star Candice Neethling and her Namibian partner Vera Adrian (Dorma Kaba). Another young and promising South African, Mariske Strauss, will team up with Briton Annie Last and will also be hoping to make an impression. The last South African to win the category was Yolande Speedy, riding with Briton Catherine Williamson, in 2013. There will also be considerable interest in a woman racing in the mixed category: Olympic gold medallist Jenny Rissveds of Sweden will be riding with her team manager, Thomas Frischknecht of Switzerland (Scott SRAM). The 22-year-old Rissveds has suggested that her objective will simply be to finish the race, but she has such outstanding ability that she is likely to be at or near the front. The race starts with a prologue in Durbanville on Sunday. The 691km route takes riders from the prologue to stages in Hermanus, Greyton, Elgin and the finish near Franschhoek on March 26. There is 15,400m of vertical gain over that distance.