Washington — The Federal Reserve raised its benchmark lending rate by 0.25% on Wednesday and continued to project two more increases this year, signalling more vigilance as inflation approaches its target. "In view of realised and expected labour market conditions and inflation, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate," the Federal open market committee said in its statement. "Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced." Investors had almost fully expected the increase to a range of 0.75%-1% following unusually clear signals from policy makers, including chair Janet Yellen. "I’m a little bit surprised" Fed officials continued to forecast a total of three rate increases in 2017, said Daniel North, chief economist at credit insurer Euler Hermes. "Inflation is rising, so I’ve been thinking they would project four hikes to keep the financial markets prepared" for a more rapid pace of rate moves. Yields on two-year US Treasuries declined about five basis points to 1.32% at 2.19pm in New York and 10-year yields fell seven basis points to 2.53%. The S&P 500 index of US stocks was up 0.7% at 2,381.52 points. The US economy has mostly met the central bank’s goals of full employment and stable prices, and may get further support if President Donald Trump delivers promised fiscal stimulus. For now, officials stuck with their "gradual" approach to tightening monetary policy, while removing the word "only" when a previous statement called the approach "only gradual". Central bankers left unchanged their median projections for three-quarter percentage-point increases in 2018, while the median fed funds rate estimate for 2019 rose to 3% from 2.9%. They made several changes to their language on inflation. "The committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation developments relative to its symmetric inflation goal," the Fed said in its statement. "The committee expects that economic condition will evolve in a manner that will warrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate." The committee described job gains as "solid" and said business investment "appears to have firmed somewhat". Inflation, the Fed said in its statement, was "moving close" to the committee’s 2% target. Yellen has said the scaling back of monetary stimulus would not be as slow as 2015 and 2016, when the Fed delivered only two increases. Minneapolis Fed president Neel Kashkari voted against the decision to increase rates, dissenting in favour of a hold. He was the only contrary vote on the committee. Inflation was forecast to reach 1.9% in the fourth quarter of 2017, and 2% in both 2018 and 2019, according to quarterly median estimates released with the Federal open market committee statement. The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation rose 1.9% in the 12 months to end-January, just shy of its target. Officials projected unemployment to finish 2017 at 4.5%, unchanged from the December forecast. That is a sign that they expect to overshoot their estimate for maximum use of labour resources, which they put at 4.7%, down from 4.8% in December. Unemployment was forecast to end 2018 and 2019 at 4.5%. The jobless rate was 4.7% in February. US central bankers left unchanged their forecast for 2017 GDP growth at 2.1%. The median estimate showed the economy expanding 2.1% in 2018 and 1.9% in 2019, compared with 2% and 1.9% in the December forecast. The third rate increase since the 2007-09 recession was well telegraphed, following comments in recent weeks from officials including vice-chairman Stanley Fischer and New York Fed chief William Dudley, who called the case for a March move as "a lot more compelling". Investor and business confidence has soared since Trump won the US presidency in November, buoyed by his vows to cut taxes, lift infrastructure spending and ease regulations. Still, economic data do not show an economy that is heating up rapidly. Retail sales in February grew at the slowest pace since August, a government report showed earlier on Wednesday. The Atlanta Fed’s model for GDP predicts an expansion of 0.9% in the first quarter, less than a third the pace Trump is aiming for. Bloomberg