Sometimes, breaking the rules is incredibly effective. In the business world, the same dynamic applies, but it is not about breaking rules arbitrarily. Some rules are incredibly important. Take compliance for example: it’s non-negotiable and the cost of breaking rules can be fatal to your organisation. But some rules can be broken. And sometimes, breaking them can hand you an industry on a platter. Rules and norms accumulate over time. No system naturally tends towards simplicity. Left to evolve, everything becomes more and more complex, as each contributor builds new layers of rules and norms on top of old ones. Increasing complexity is actually the path of least resistance. Simplicity then, far from being a natural state, requires intelligent design. It’s a big part of the reason that so little disruptive innovation comes from within an industry. Taxi drivers didn’t invent Uber, and bankers didn’t invent PayPal, because the people within these industries think through the lenses of their own complex norms. It takes a rule-breaking maverick to see a thing afresh and venture that there might be a better way. Fight complexity: Take Steve Jobs’s obsession with simple, clean, elegant design. In no small part, it’s what saved Apple upon his return to the company. But it meant saying no to an extensive product range, extra buttons and excessive complexity. Clearing away clutter, resisting the creep of added complexity and disbanding outdated rules requires intelligent design. It requires challenging existing systems and finding ways to simplify them. Simplification is an art. How much do bad rules really cost you? There are at least 10 compelling reasons for reducing and relaxing the rules in your organisation. Some impact directly on the bottom line and can be measured in monetary terms. Others also affect the bottom line, but inadvertently, for instance, by promoting a culture of innovation, which can be lucrative. What follows are the visible and hidden ways in which rules can hurt your company. • Speed: Rules entail processes that have to be followed. Each process may take a small amount of time in isolation. But pile rule upon rule and even a simple procedure, like ordering stationery, can become an unreasonably slow process.. Sometimes useful things are not allowed to happen at all, because a rule flat out prevents them from being done. Other times, a useful idea can’t get to market quickly enough. It took Google two years to get all the vetting they needed from Legal and Marketing to release Google+. By then, Facebook had such a critical mass that their product’s excellent compliance didn’t matter. • Willingness: When simple acts are slow to do because of the burden of procedures, the willingness to do them drops. People perceive that going above and beyond is too much trouble. They are trained and conditioned to actively reduce their contribution. • The burden of frustration: With decreased speed and increased procedures, the word "no" is heard so often it becomes a form of cultural conditioning. ‘No’, applied often, trains away initiative and propensity for risk-taking. • Mistrust: The greater the weight of the rules, the more you need people watching people, in order to enforce those rules. In an ideal organisation, where people are trustworthy and operate in a high-trust environment, you require only one person to police each person: themselves. • Poorer decisions: When power is decentralised, the people at the proverbial coalface can make decisions that are often better suited to their actual environment. They are right there and can see the problems, the nuances and the immediate repercussions. But when the rules state that the decisions must be imported from a geographically separate head office, the decisions cannot possibly take the full picture into account and the quality may suffer. • Loss of talent: Feelings of empowerment and a sense of purpose are among the chief needs of employees. Feelings of disempowerment and a retarded sense of purpose are strong incentives to leave, and among the primary causes of depression in human beings. Maintain a sense of powerlessness and frustration long enough, and you might haemorrhage top talent. • Unhealthy natural attrition: In a rules-based culture, the highly obedient, low-initiative workers stay; the frustrated innovators and high-initiative workers leave. Taken to its logical conclusion, everyone who remains blindly obeys the rules and kowtows to authority, because no one has the "radical value" not to. You create the conditions for extreme groupthink. • Security trumping risk-taking: In cases when rules directly contradict goals, your people will tend to choose safety and job security over risk and bold action. The possibility of messy innovation attempts is shut down, precluding the possibility of smartcuts that can equal exponential growth. • Silos galore: In a high-rules culture, people tend not to focus on the big picture. They lose sight of the mission. They are terrified of contradicting the internal norms and rules of their team or division, and will tend to prioritise behaviour that creates safety for themselves within that smaller division (silo), over behaviour that helps the company as a whole. • Missed opportunity: When an organisation is swept up on the irresistible tide of its own norms, it can almost never see, or act upon, new developments in the market. Startups tend to way outperform big organisations when it comes to new ideas and technology because they have a clean slate. They can be much more opportunity aggressive. The result of these accumulated costs will be that growth will only happen incrementally in your organisation, if at all. Which rules does your organisation cling to, for no reason other than that the rules have always existed? They are your rules — you can break them. And the ones who do so, strategically acquire the leverage to topple the industry giants and create truly disruptive innovation. • Kruger is author of They’re Your Rules, Break Them!