Tuesday’s second stage of the Absa Cape Epic was a lot shorter and faster than anyone planned, but it provided exciting racing with sprint finishes in the men’s and women’s categories. In a late-night decision, based on advice from the medical team worried about more extreme heat and humidity on the stage, the distance was reduced from a tough 102km from Hermanus to Greyton to a quick 62km blast to Caledon. The shorter route generated spectacular, tight racing. In the men’s event, Christoph Sauser and Jaroslav Kulhavy (Investec-Songo-Specialized) fought back from about a minute behind with 15km to go to lead the top three teams into the hastily erected finish at the Caledon Botanical Gardens. Their one-second advantage meant there was little change in the general classification with surprise leaders Cannondale Factory Racing’s Manuel Fumic and Henrique Avancini, third on  stage 2, still 2min 39sec ahead after their victories on the opening two days’ riding. The Olympic and World Champion Nino Schurter and Matthias Stirnemann (Scott-Sram MTB Racing) were second on Tuesday, but will be third overall, 5:22 behind the leaders, heading into the 78km stage 3, which starts and finishes in Greyton on Wednesday. "That was very tough. The first half was so fast and then we didn’t stop at all for water," said Kulhavy. "I was worried at one stage, but we managed to pull through," he said. Schurter was happy with his performance on the shortened stage. "It was a good race today. I knew that when they made it shorter, we could expect a fast day," he said. "Our plan was just to see how the day unfolded. "We decided to attack on the hot spot and Manny and Henrique came with us. Jaro and Susi dropped off, but then after some single track, there was a flat section, where Jaro’s power helped," Schurter said. In the race for the Hansgrohe Women’s title, overall leaders Esther Suss and Jennie Stenerhag (Meerendal CBC) added a few seconds to their overall lead when they got the better of the Ascendis Health duo of German Sabine Spitz and her South African partner Robyn de Groot for the second day in a row. However, after their nine-minute win on Monday, they were only able to add a few seconds to their lead. There was concern over Spitz after a scary crash off a steep trail on Monday, but despite stitches above her eye, she was able to ride comfortably with the leaders on Tuesday. "I am very happy with the way the week is going," said Stenerhag. "It’s great to be in the lead. Esther and I are having a great time. Today was quite strange because we had no idea where the finish was." Like the men’s race, the shorter distance did not mean an easier ride for those chasing titles. "Shorter often equals harder," said Stenerhag. "The pace was really up from the minute we started," she said.