Until the current generation of Bafana Bafana players win something‚ it would be difficult to call them the greatest national team ever assembled‚ reserve goalkeeper Darren Keet said. Bafana face Angola in a friendly international match at Buffalo City Stadium in East London on Tuesday night and Keet said that it would be good for the country if the new national team coach kept the core of the team together and beefed it up with in-form players every now and then. "It’s a good feeling for the guys to be recognised as probably one of the best teams around for SA‚" he said. "Hopefully, it only gets better from there." Asked if he agreed with his teammate Kamohelo Mokotjo‚ who was quoted as saying he is honoured to be part of the best squad yet to be assembled‚ the Wits goalkeeper said it was hard to say. "We’ve had a lot of teams that have done well for Bafana. Obviously, they won the Africa Nations Cup in 96 and the team that went to the 2002 World Cup actually did well. "As a team, we haven’t achieved much — we haven’t won, so it’s hard to really say on that basis because people want a team that wins things. "You can never say a team is the best when you haven’t won a thing‚ so let’s hope we do get there. Let’s hope we do go upwards and continue to improve as a team." Bafana won their friendly 3-1 against Guinea-Bissau at Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban on Saturday. Asked how he felt about competing for the first-team jersey with captain Itumeleng Khune‚ Keet said competition was healthy. "I’m always here to work harder. I think of myself and Shu-Aib Walters and the other keepers that come in and always work hard. "We’re ready to perform just as much as anyone else in the team. I’ll even compete to play at left-back, if they need me. That doesn’t bother me." Injuries to four key players have left caretaker coach Owen da Gama with plenty to think about ahead of the match against Angola. Defenders Eric Mathoho and Thulani Hlatshwayo‚ and midfielders Dean Furman and Andile Jali are doubtful for the encounter. The four were injured during Saturday’s game in Durban and Da Gama will have to shuffle his deck if they do not recover in time for the Angola match. "It’s a concern when you have players injured, but the good thing is that we have brought a good number of players with lots of quality‚ so we will not rush these ones back‚" Da Gama said. "We had already said we are going to make changes‚ so if the quartet doesn’t recover on time for the match, we are still covered." Sundowns’ Tiyani Mabunda is likely to come into the side. The defensive midfielder experienced some action against Guinea-Bissau when he came off the bench on Saturday. "After Monday night’s training session‚ we will have to check their status with the medical team and take it from there." TMG Digital