Hamilton — On Friday, injured South African Quinton de Kock was cleared to play in the third Test against New Zealand after captain Faf du Plessis said resting the influential wicketkeeper-batsman was not an option. Despite SA having an unbeatable 1-0 lead going into Saturday’s final Test, Du Plessis described their batting as "not good enough" and said he wanted his best possible team on the field. "It’s a big game. Quinton is someone who you don’t just replace. From my side, I am trying to have Quinton in my team all the time," he said. South African team medical officials say it could take several weeks for the ligament damage in De Kock’s right index finger to heal. But after wearing a protective covering to dull the pain during batting and fielding practice he was given approval to play. New Zealand have strike bowlers Tim Southee and Trent Boult along with senior batsman Ross Taylor sidelined by injury, and Du Plessis said while that made things "a little bit easier" it was no reason to rest De Kock. "We’ll be trying to put as much pressure on New Zealand, playing our strongest team. To push [De Kock] for one more game is something that’s important for the team," the captain said before the training session. "If it’s a 50-50 [injury], and I think it is, then he will be able to play definitely because it’s a big game for us. To rest him for someone else, for me personally, is not an option." The number two South African wicketkeeper on this tour, Heinrich Klaasen, has never played a Test. Turnaround Central to Du Plessis’s drive to field his strongest side is that another victory over New Zealand will lift South Africa to number two in the world, completing a remarkable turnaround since being ranked as low as seventh 12 months ago. "It’s been an incredible year for us and that’s why [this Test] is so important for me," he said. "Our goal was to try get back to number two at the end of the season, and if we do that in this Test match it will be an incredible year and we’ve ticked every box and we’ve won every series we’ve played." De Kock made 91 in a 160-run match-winning partnership with Temba Bavuma (89) in the second Test, but Du Plessis said too few South African batsmen were scoring runs. "The standard we set for ourselves as a batting unit is extremely high and we haven’t delivered on that," he said. "In every series we’ve played there’s been one or two guys that’s put their hand up and that’s been great. But, if we don’t have those guys who save us on the day there would have been a few times we would have been rolled out cheaply. "So that’s a concern and that’s something we have to work on. It’s not good enough." Kiwi dilemma New Zealand captain Kane Williamson, meanwhile, was still mulling over the make-up of his side ahead of Saturday’s third Test, with the Seddon Park wicket proving difficult to pin down. With the pace bowling duo of Boult and Southee ruled out, and uncapped Scott Kuggeleijn brought into the 13 to provide cover, Matt Henry and Neil Wagner were expected to start. Williamson also suggested the hosts could consider picking two spinners in Mitchell Santner and Jeetan Patel, with just one all-rounder from Jimmy Neesham and Colin de Grandhomme. "It’s an interesting process, with so many injuries, to try and nut down the balance we want to go with," Williamson told reporters in Hamilton on Friday. "[The wicket] never has a huge amount of pace but offers a little bit for the seamers, and I think that side of the block can be a little slower than the other side. So there might be a little spin." Williamson was unsure as to whether uncapped all-rounder Kuggeleijn would make the side, but said he had been impressed by his performances in first-class cricket. Kuggeleijn has 166 first-class wickets in 51 games, and averages almost 31 with the bat. "He’s an exciting prospect, been playing very well for a number of years at domestic level," Williamson added. "He’s been one of the top performers with the ball in hand but has also scored a number of runs in that middle to lower order. It’s exciting for him to be involved." SA lead the three-match series 1-0 after an eight-wicket victory in the second game at the Basin Reserve. Boult and Southee were not the only absentees for the last match in New Zealand’s domestic programme, with senior batsman Ross Taylor also out injured. The hosts collapsed against SA in the second Test, with Keshav Maharaj taking career-best figures of 6-40 on a pitch that was not offering much assistance to the left-arm spinner. Williamson said his team had to play better in Hamilton. "There’s a number of young guys in the team and they’re really looking forward to the challenge of playing one of the best teams in world cricket," he said. "We want to go out, show some fight, play a few shots, bowl in the right areas, be nice and aggressive and leave it all out on the field." AFP and Reuters