Singapore &mdash; What a difference a year makes, especially when it comes with hundreds of million of dollars in unexpected cash prizes. At the start of 2016, Vedanta Resources&rsquo;s 2019 dollar bonds were trading at less than 50c on the dollar; now, they&rsquo;re well above par.Founder and chairman Anil Agarwal is celebrating by launching a debt-funded dalliance with Anglo American. Both the billionaire and his bond-holders should raise a toast to zinc.Hindustan Zinc, in which Agarwal picked up a controlling stake 15 years ago from the Indian government, announced a whopping $2.1bn dividend on Thursday, taking the total annual pay-out to more than $4bn.The Indian government continues to own 29.5% of the zinc producer. Strip away its share, and that of other minority investors in India, and the cash getting wired to Vedanta from the latest dividend still amounts to $720m. That&rsquo;s enough to pay the London-based company&rsquo;s $508m obligations this year to creditors and then some.But that&rsquo;s still only a sliver of total group debt. As much as $3.2bn in interest and principal comes due next year at the main company and its subsidiaries. The bigger the zinc bounty, the less difficulty the group should have in meeting its financial commitments.After almost doubling since early last year, zinc prices are holding up. For all the talk of the metal getting muscled out by aluminium in galvanised sheets used to make cars, the market is more focused on supply disruptions, such as the strike at a mine in Quebec.Agarwal and his bond-holders aren&rsquo;t the only ones with reason to rejoice: the Indian government ends up a winner too. A judicial challenge to the legality of the 2002 privatisation of Hindustan Zinc meant it couldn&rsquo;t sell its remaining shares to the billionaire. New Delhi would be crazy to off-load them at this point.In September, shareholders of Cairn India blessed the plan to merge with Vedanta, adding ballast to Agarwal s dream of creating a resources conglomerate to rival the likes of BHP Billiton. Now, he wants to buy $2.4bn of Anglo American shares to help pave the way to his goal.The bigger the tycoon s ambitions get, the keener he ll be to pump cash out of the zinc business. The Indian government just needs to sit back and collect its pound of flesh. This Gadfly column does not necessarily reflect the opinion of Bloomberg and/or its ownersBloomberg