We lost the bet on the SA Car of the Year 2017. Our money was firmly on the Volkswagen Tiguan to take the title, but in the end it did not even feature in the top three. Well done to General Motors SA, because this year’s Wesbank/SA Guild of Motoring Journalists Car of the Year is the Opel Astra. It is a great package, although we are still not convinced it beats the VW Golf in the segment. It adds the local silverware to a previous European Car of the Year award and a host of other accolades for its great engine, excellent specification and good drive. We lost this bet, but Tiguan is in the running for the World Car of the Year title against the Audi Q5 and Jaguar F-Pace so perhaps we can win our money back on that one. Stalwart on the way Jeep is basically keeping Fiat Chrysler in business these days and one of the most famous Jeeps of all, the Wrangler, will enter a new era in 2018. Sources have confirmed the next generation will be made mostly of steel but in the interests of weight reduction and lower consumption, there will be an increased use of aluminium. Engines will include the usual Pentastar V6 petrol but there is also likely to be a 3.0l turbodiesel and a new 2.0l Hurricane four-cylinder to bring down emissions and consumption. The new Wrangler could also feature a three-piece hardtop which will allow different panels to be removed, or all of them for that fully open top appeal. Spyder crawling in The on again, off again BMW i8 Spyder looks to be back on, with spies spotting the car testing in the chilly conditions of northern Sweden confirming the canvas roof design. The Spyder will also benefit from the facelift that is set to also be introduced on the coupe in 2018. Under the skin both models will get slightly more power and thanks to upgrades to the battery pack, the new i8 is likely to benefit from a 50% increase in range. Our sources insist the new i8 will also become more fun for keen drivers with a driving mode that is slightly more tail-happy. Crossing the Rio We have known that Kia and Hyundai are working on new B-segment crossovers, but now Kia has registered the name Stonic, which looks likely to be used for its contender. The new model is likely to be shown for the first time at the Frankfurt Motor Show in September and images we have seen show similar styling to the new Rio, making it something of a Rio crossover to take on Volkswagen’s upcoming T-Roc. It is unknown whether it will be front or all-wheel drive but sources tell us Kia wants to take on the Nissan Juke, so all-wheel drive is a possibility. To Infiniti and beyond Infiniti has all but disappeared from the South African market. Officially the company says high exchange rates have forced it to stop importing new models but that if the situation improves it will look at bringing Nissan’s luxury models into the country again. Internationally though, Infiniti has scored something of a coup with the announcement that former BMW brand design boss Karim Habib will take over the onerous task of sculpting the premium brand. Habib, who also has senior Mercedes-Benz roles on his resume, will start working at the brand’s Atsugi, Japan, office in July after a period of "gardening leave". The poaching of the 46-year-old Habib comes after a reshuffle forced by the planned retirement of former Nissan design head Shiro Nakamura at the end of March. Current Infiniti design boss Alfonso Albaisa will take over the top job at Nissan, with Habib reporting directly to him. "Karim has a strong background and impressive track record in automotive design and the knowledge and mind-set to develop a global premium brand," Infiniti president Roland Krueger said. Bringing sporty back Audi revealed its mighty RS5 at the Geneva motor show earlier this month, but it seems it kept one major piece of news to itself. For the first time the company is set to introduce a RS5 Sportback. So far we only have confirmation that the model is in the pipeline with no specific details, but we expect it to follow the regular RS5 in using the same biturbo V6 delivering 331kW and 600Nm.