Net1 CEO Serge Belamant says that Cash Paymaster Services (CPS) has agreed to a set of terms that will see it being involved in the payment of social grants from April 1. The contract entered into between the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) and CPS in 2012 to pay grant recipients was declared unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court in 2014. CPS is a subsidiary of Net 1. The court‚ however‚ did not set aside the contract‚ but ordered the Department of Social Development to open a tender for a new contract or allow the CPS contract to run until its conclusion at the end of March 2017. The department has been unable to get a new contractor and is now scrambling to ensure that it is able to pay recipients on April 1‚ when the contract with CPS expires. In a media briefing on Sunday‚ Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini promised that grant recipients would be paid on April 1. However‚ she did not want to comment on whether it had reached an agreement with CPS on a new contract without going through a transparent tender process‚ as required by the Constitutional Court. Belamant said on Monday that he did not see a reason why a new contract should not be signed. "During Wednesday‚ Thursday and Friday‚ we agreed on a set of terms with Sassa on two very‚ very important issues‚ one of them were commercial terms going forward‚ and the other set of terms is what we were going to do on behalf of Sassa in order for them to take in-house a number of technical processes which we currently perform‚" Belamant told Radio 702. Belamant said these terms were agreed during the meeting between Sassa‚ CPS and the Department of Social Development. These terms were sent to the parties’ respective attorneys for them to finalise the service agreement‚ which was to be signed early this week‚ Belamant said. "As far as I am concerned‚ there will be no reason why the service level agreement will not be signed‚" Belamant said. During Dlamini’s briefing on Sunday‚ the department’s acting CEO Thamo Mzobe said there was no deal with any company. "A deal will mean a signed off contract and a service level agreement. That has not happened‚" Mzobe said. TMG Digital