Cell C says it has swung into the black, reporting a surprise full-year profit of R540m after 16 years, the first since its start-up in 2001.For years, the company has been weighed down by massive debt and underperformance. Cell C&#8217;s loss for the 2015 financial year was R5.6bn.Cell C chief financial officer Robert Pasley said on Tuesday that much of the loss in 2015 had been the result of unrealised foreign exchange losses.The company had increased earnings before interest and tax by R1.26bn in 2016 compared with 2015, he said.&quot;This increase contributed greatly in the company moving from a loss to a profit position in 2017. [Most] of the remainder of the movement was made up of foreign exchange gains due to the stronger rand.&quot;The business is still not out of the woods, however, as it will require substantial capital expenditure (capex) to compete aggressively against its rivals.Its R2.8bn infrastructure funding for 2017 is still a fraction of that of its competitors. MTN SA will spend R11.5bn in 2017 on upgrading its high-speed network infrastructure.Cell C CEO Jose Dos Santos said capex was linked to revenue growth. &quot;If revenue starts growing and more customers come along maybe we will increase capex.&quot;Revenue for the 2016 financial year grew to R14.6bn from R13.2bn. Cell C has 15.3-million subscribers, up 20%.The company has revised its description of a customer in line with its competitors, which define a customer as having been active for three months.Cell C has been recapitalising the business for the past year with Blue Label, Net1 and existing shareholders, which should result in a drastic reduction of its R23bn debt to R6bn.After the programme, which is expected to be finalised in June, Blue Label will be the single biggest shareholder at 45%, while Net1 will own 15%, contributing R5.5bn and R2bn, respectively. Six of Cell C&#8217;s top managers, including Dos Santos and Pasley, will receive 5% of B-class shares, which may be converted into A-class shares if they met their performance targets.Dos Santos said the six had been handpicked by shareholders for their responsibilities and influence. &quot;The equity partners wanted to tie up six people they felt were critical to the business. We have to sit here for five years to deliver [on targets].&quot;It is an aggressive share incentive scheme.&quot;Cell C&#8217;s founding shareholders, CellSaf and Oger Telecom, will have 30%, while the remaining 5% has yet to be allocated. Dos Santos would not comment on how and to whom the 5% would be allocated.He said about 2,000 Cell C employees would hold shares through an employee share incentive scheme. &quot;The staff is very involved. It&#8217;s a powerful programme that we are putting together. My objective is for the staff to be happy and to create wealth.&quot;Dos Santos said none of the lenders would convert debt to equity. Creditors include Nedbank, China-Africa Development Fund and the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China.