It seems that only a power failure can stop Mamelodi Sundowns from racking up wins at the moment. Such an assessment would be unfair to Chippa United‚ though‚ who held Sundowns to a second draw — this time 0-0 — in the space of three weeks in a two-day premiership game at Loftus Versfeld completed on Wednesday morning. These two teams have not been able to beat each other over 180 minutes‚ Chippa having also drawn 1-1 with Downs in Mdantsane‚ East London‚ on February 14. There were extenuating factors to Wednesday morning’s result‚ not least that the game started on Tuesday night‚ while winning machine Downs have also been hampered by injuries and a manic schedule. The match had to be abandoned in the 42nd minute on Tuesday night, when the lights went out at Loftus because of a power failure in the Hatfield area of Pretoria. The teams‚ as Premier Soccer League rules require‚ could not agree on a time within the next 48 hours for the game to be completed. So the league‚ mindful no doubt of an already compacted and extended fixtures list‚ set a time of 10am on Wednesday. Sundowns will play again on Friday night away against Cape Town City‚ while Chippa will meet Platinum Stars in Rustenburg‚ so time was of the essence to complete this game. Downs came into the fixture buoyed by a 2-0 win against arguably their greatest challengers for the title‚ Wits‚ at this stadium on Saturday. In that game, Downs were already suffering injuries to rightback Anele Ngcongca‚ winger Anthony Laffor and forward Khama Billiat‚ while goalkeeper Denis Onyango went off early. Wayne Sandilands‚ Thapelo Morena‚ Sibusiso Vilakazi and Yannick Zakri had come in against Wits. Downs coach Pitso Mosimane made other tactical changes‚ introducing Ricardo Nascimento for Wayne Arendse at centreback‚ Fares Hachi at leftback for Tebogo Langerman and Lucky Mohomi in midfield for Tiyani Mabunda. So much rotation in the space of a few games — even for Sundowns‚ as they play catch-up in a hectic schedule — must not be easy on rhythm. Even before the overnight disruption‚ the 42 minutes played on Tuesday were flatly contested by both sides. There was a clear chance to either side in the half. In the 17th minute, Mohomi’s dipping ball from right midfield dropped on to the head of Hlompho Kekana‚ whose sharp header at Daniel Akpeyi had to be taken at the second bite by Chippa’s goalkeeper. In the 32nd, Andile Mbenyane curled a shot from the left corner of the area that appeared headed for the top-right corner before a fine one-arm intercept by Sandilands. The final three minutes‚ plus a minute’s injury time‚ of the first half played on Wednesday morning was uneventful. Not surprisingly‚ both sides struggled to find their rhythm again. Downs enjoyed the greater part of offensive play in the second half but lacked their normal deadliness in a final pass. With no clear scoring opportunities coming‚ with 15 minutes remaining, Mosimane brought on Leonardo Castro for Themba Zwane‚ Teko Modise for Zakri and Asavela Mbekile for Vilakazi. The changes had the desired result as Castro got a shot on goal‚ almost pulling off a finish between Akpeyi’s legs. Modise’s shot from range came very close as Downs pushed hard at the end. TMG Digital