Lions coach Johan Ackermann admitted he was considering an offer to join English team Gloucester next season. He is yet to make up his mind. "The offer is there but I haven’t made a decision‚" Ackermann said. "I don’t want to give you a time frame about when I will decide because I don’t want the players to be affected by that. "I will make up my mind at an appropriate time." The Lions‚ meanwhile‚ have been restored to full strength for Saturday’s clash against the Reds at Ellis Park following their exertions in Argentina Elton Jantjies is back at flyhalf‚ Rohan Janse van Rensburg and Lionel Mapoe at centre‚ and Franco Mostert will operate at the heart of the engine room in his 50th Super Rugby game. It is Mostert that coach Ackermann hopes will provide the spark up front that was absent last week in Buenos Aires. "He really energises the players around him and he is a real character. "He has served us well considering the car accident when he broke his hip. The doctors back then told him he would not play again‚" said Ackermann. In the backline there will be a Super Rugby debut for Under-19 star Madosh Tambwe at the expense of Sylvian Mahuza. "We are very excited about him. He’s a former Jeppe [High] boy and he’s very much a local boy. We got him back having trained with the South African Under-20 team." With his best players now more or less reassembled in the starting line-up Ackermann defended his decision to travel to Argentina without some of his most experienced players. The Lions lost 36-24 to the Jaguares. "It wasn’t the same as last year when we left 16 players behind. This time only four players remained behind and we really didn’t have a choice in two of those instances." Kick-off is at 5.15pm. Cheetahs coach Franco Smith has rotated his squad for Saturday’s clash against the Jaguares in Buenos Aires. After three successive home games‚ of which the Cheetahs won two‚ there is a sense Smith has conceded that winning in Argentina will be difficult and opted to protect key players. Scrumhalf Tian Meyer will lead the team with hooker Torsten van Jaarsveld being rested for this match. It gives former SA Under-20 hooker Joseph Dwebe a chance to make his Super Rugby debut if he takes the field. Smith has also bracketed centre William Small-Smith with flank Boom Prinsloo on the bench‚ which indicates he is undecided on his precise gameplan and whether to have a six/two or five/three split between forwards and backs. Small-Smith‚ Prinsloo‚ lock Carl Wegner and reserve scrumhalf Shaun Venter have all overcome injuries and will relish the chance to get their seasons up and running. Smith also rotated the starting front row with props Danie Mienie and Tom Botha running on alongside hooker Elandre Huggett. Flyhalf Fred Zeilinga‚ who has been in excellent form this season‚ is also benched with Neil Marais starting. The latter was impressive when he came off the wood to play centre during last week’s 38-31 win over the Sunwolves. Bruising loose forward Paul Schoeman‚ who is on the bench this weekend‚ said he expected a tough physical challenge from the Jaguares. Schoeman left the field early during last week’s victory over the Sunwolves with suspected concussion‚ but he has cleared his protocols this week. "It wasn’t good playing for such a short while‚ but it’s part of the game‚" Schoeman told Bloemfontein radio station OFM. "I felt good during my short time on the field‚ especially in defence. I didn’t really get much chance to run with the ball and it would have been a lekker game to finish. "As far as the Jaguares are concerned they are much tougher to play over here but if I get a chance to play I can only give it my best. "They physical aspect of the game suits me. The tougher the better." TMG Digital