South African football was embroiled in another scandal on Monday, when Fifa said the national team’s World Cup qualifying win over Senegal in 2016 was fixed, leaving the legacy of the country’s hosting of the 2010 finals in further turmoil. In banning Ghanaian referee Joseph Lamptey for life, world soccer’s governing body said the outcome of SA’s 2-1 home win in African Group D in November had been contrived. The official was found guilty of unlawfully influencing the match result after handing SA a soft penalty for a handball just before halftime and allowing a second goal in controversial circumstances from a quickly taken free-kick soon after in a qualifying match for the 2018 finals in Russia. Who had influenced Lamptey to help SA win the match was not dealt with in Fifa’s statement. However, the world ruling body did say: "Further information concerning the SA vs Senegal match in question will be provided once the decision becomes final and binding ." Fifa officials, who did not want to be named, told Reuters that match-fixing was uncovered following irregular betting activity. South African Football Association (Safa) did not respond on Monday to questions about the match-fixing allegations. The disclosure follows allegations that SA paid a $10m bribe to help secure the rights to the 2010 World Cup and that officials were duped by an Asian betting syndicate over the results of warm-up matches before the finals. Although SA Sport Minister Fikile Mbalula rejected the bribery allegation a year ago, the scandals have tarnished the legacy of the World Cup, said domestic experts. SA is still reeling from the allegations made by US prosecutors that a payment of $10m to former Fifa vice-president Jack Warner during the country’s successful bid to stage the 2010 World Cup was a bribe. The government in 2007 approved a $10m project to support the African diaspora in Caribbean countries and Fifa paid the money, from a budget allocated to SA for hosting costs, to Warner, who controlled large bloc s of votes. Instead of the money being used for its intended purpose, it was pocketed by Warner, said former Fifa executive committee member Chuck Blazer, who has pleaded guilty to racketeering, wire fraud and money laundering, in US court documents. Warner denies wrongdoing. Separately, a post-2010 World Cup investigation revealed that the outcome of several of SA’s pre-tournament friendlies were manipulated after African soccer officials were duped into using referees paid by a Singapore-based betting syndicate. Several African officials, including a former Safa president, have been banned by Fifa over the affair. "The buoyancy we felt with hosting the World Cup seems very far away now ," local soccer editor Richard Maguire said on Monday. Reuters