Approving a bank licence is not to be taken lightly and spending seven months mulling over the matter is not unreasonable, the Treasury has argued in its opposition to the Gupta-aligned Vardospan Limited’s urgent court bid to fast-track the process of acquiring Habib Bank. Treasury director-general Lungisa Fuzile put this argument in an affidavit submitted to the High Court in Pretoria. "The applicant and Pitcairns seek … to impose their own deadlines ... on the respondents who are tasked with important decisions which impact the public. These are decisions that cannot be taken lightly," Fuzile said in the affidavit. "By way of illustration, section 37 (2)(a) of the [Banks] Act ordinarily contemplates a minimum period of four years (subject to a fresh regulatory decision by the registrar or the minister after each of these years) in which a person can proceed from holding less than 15% of the shares or voting rights of a bank or controlling company to the point at which their holding can exceed 74%," he said. In this case, the applicant sought to move from zero to 99.9% shareholding in seven months and wanted the court to compel the Reserve Bank and the Treasury to "rush their decisions" to meet their timetable. "The problem is compounded by the fact that all of the companies involved in the proposed transaction, namely the applicant itself and its proposed shareholders Peal Capital and CINQ, are all newly established companies with no known business activities," Fuzile said. He said the matter should be struck from the roll with a punitive costs order. Vardospan has approached the high court in a bid to force the registrar to make a determination on its application by Friday. The Bank, the registrar of banks and Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan have asked the court to dismiss the application. Arguments were heard in the Palace of Justice on Thursday afternoon. The court has reserved judgment on the urgency of the matter until 10am on Friday. This comes at a time when it is understood that more than half of the bank accounts of Gupta-related entities have been closed in recent weeks by their last remaining bankers, the Bank of Baroda, with the process continuing. However, Oakbay Investments, the Gupta holding company in SA, has denied this. Entities linked to the politically connected family, said to have strong ties to President Jacob Zuma, are embroiled in legal disputes with Gordhan and the Bank. Kuben Naidoo, the Reserve Bank deputy-governor and banks registrar said in an affidavit that Vardospan Limited had failed to provide information needed to finalise its banking licence application. "Had Vardospan provided the requested information timeously, the Banks Act application may well have been finalised by now," he said. Vardospan director Hamza Farooqui said in an affidavit it had been seven months since its application was submitted. He accused the Bank and Gordhan, who is cited as a respondent, of failing to take a timeous decision on the matter and demanded that a decision be taken 24 hours after the application to the court was decided upon.