"Lady Luck" deserted trainer Mike de Kock when the draw took place for Saturday’s $10m Dubai World Cup with his big race hope, Mubtaahij, drawing the outside stall in the 14-runner field. Second in this race 12 months ago, De Kock had said that "Mubtaahij is looking better than I’ve ever seen him". Commenting on the horse’s barrier of 14, assistant trainer Trevor Brown said: "We’re very happy with his progress since his last run. You’ve got to take what you get." Arrogate, quoted the 1-3 favourite by UK bookies, drew stall nine and trainer Bob Baffert seemed happy enough with the position of the US raider. "Nine is fine. The main thing for him is to get away, then it’s up to jockey Mike Smith to decide. I just didn’t want to be on the outside at 14, otherwise it didn’t really matter. I have a great horse. If he just repeats his last race, we’ll be in good shape," said Baffert. Gun Runner is quoted 7-1 second favourite for the World Cup, with Mubtaahij at 8-1 and Arrogate’s stablemate Hoppertunity appealing as an attractive place bet at 14-1. De Kock will also saddle three-year-old Fawree in the UAE Derby, which is a race the South African maestro has won six times. The stable believes the colt’s problems at the start have been sorted out. In ante-post betting, Fawree is quoted fourth favourite behind Thunder Snow, Epicurius and Master Plan. Due to the Dubai meeting, Saturday’s Turffontein programme will only commence at 2.25pm. There are a number of feature races including the Oaks and Derby Trials. Those fancying a Dubai-SA double might consider coupling Zarak in the Dubai Turf and Geoff Woodruff’s filly Street Gaze in the Oaks Trial. Anton Marcus partners Street Gaze and his mount could prove too smart for Belle Rose and Balalaika. Geoff Woodruff, who trains Street Gaze, will also be hoping to capture the Derby Trial with his three-year-old, Pagoda. Although Gavin Lerena has found winners hard to find of late, he should go close on Pagoda with his toughest rival likely to be De Kock’s Alaadel. Marcus will be in the saddle on Deo Juvente in the Colorado King Stakes — the horse controversially omitted from last season’s Durban July. Fit and well, Woodruff’s runner will be tough to beat with Samurai Blade — despite a disappointing recent effort — a possible danger with Piere Strydom in the irons. Joan Ranger is enjoying an excellent season and will have his supporters in the eighth race. However, this is a tough contest with all of Crystal Glamour, Old Em and Shaama entering calculations.