Super Rugby will be cut from 18 teams to 16 for the 2018 season following a meeting of governing body Sanzaar in London last week, Cheetahs CE Harold Verster told South African media. Sanzaar, which is made up of the South African, New Zealand, Australian and Argentinian rugby unions, met last Friday to address widespread criticisms of the unwieldy 18-team format, which was introduced in 2016. Online news portal Netwerk24 cited Verster as saying one of SA’s six teams and one of Australia’s five would be cut from the 2018 competition. "There was even speculation that we would return to a Super 12, but my information is that it is going to be reduced from the current 18 to 16 teams, which means the Cheetahs are safe," Verster said. "There is much discussion about the current series and the format and that two South African teams and one Australian team would drop out. All I can say is that we are safe. I keep my ear to the ground." In Australia, the Western Force and Melbourne Rebels are seen as the most vulnerable teams in any cull. The struggling Western Force has been under the management of the Australian Rugby Union (ARU) since falling into financial strife last year. Like the Force, the Rebels have never made the playoffs but, being privately owned, are less of a financial drain on the ARU’s coffers. The CEs of Australia’s five teams were briefed in a conference call with the national rugby union on Tuesday. The ARU declined to comment, saying it would wait until Sanzaar announced the final outcome. The Eastern Cape-based Southern Kings, who rejoined the competition in 2016, are regarded as the most vulnerable of SA’s six teams. The Kings finished only above Japan’s debutant, Sunwolves, last season and had to be bailed out by SA Rugby after a financial crisis. On Saturday, Sanzaar said it would issue a statement on the future of the competition after stakeholders hold "final" consultations this week. With the competition only one year into a broadcast deal that runs to 2020, rights holders are certain to play a key role in those consultations. Reuters