SA’s history makes a strong case for social security. It is needed to stabilise a country wrecked by apartheid’s unjust and oppressive social policies. Section 27 of the Constitution provides that everyone has the right to social security, including appropriate social assistance if they are unable to support themselves and their dependants. With this constitutional undertaking, SA committed itself to an ethical duty to give everyone, not just citizens, special protections. The social grant crisis is a reminder of the real-life effect that procurement law has on society’s most vulnerable. When matters such as these arise, we as procurement lawyers have to remind ourselves that it is not just about the contracts, statistics and numbers; ultimately, we are talking about the survival of our most vulnerable members of society. In the case of AllPay Consolidated Investment Holdings and Others versus the CEO of the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) and Others, the Constitutional Court recognised the effect procurement law and service delivery have on the ultimate realisation of the promises enshrined in the Constitution. It did this by acknowledging that, for many people in this country, social grants provide the only hope of living in the material conditions the Constitution values: dignity, freedom and equality. About 11-million people depend on the payment of these grants. They are vulnerable people living at the margins of our society. The AllPay dispute turned on whether the award of a tender — one of the largest in SA’s history — by Sassa to Cash Paymaster Services (CPS) for the countrywide payment of social grants to beneficiaries was constitutionally valid. The constitutional invalidity of the contract would have serious ramifications for Sassa’s ability to fulfil its mandate as enshrined in section 27(1)(c) of the Constitution. Empowerment Credentials The dispute arose due to a number of irregularities in the bid evaluation process conducted by Sassa. For example, CPS claimed its equity partners would manage and execute more than 74% of the tender, but its tender did not substantiate this claim. All CPS did was provide particulars of the management capabilities of its workforce, which included previously disadvantaged people. Sassa did not call on CPS to substantiate its claimed empowerment credentials, presumably because by that stage, the preference points could not have affected the outcome. This in effect made the consideration of empowerment an empty shell, where preference points were calculated as a formality, but where the true goal of empowerment requirements was never given effect. The Constitutional Court found that, given the central and fundamental importance of substantive empowerment under the Constitution and the applicable public procurement and empowerment legislation, Sassa’s failure to ensure that the claimed empowerment credentials were objectively confirmed was fatally defective. The court declared that the award of the tender to CPS was constitutionally invalid. By the time the matter was heard, however, the national system for the payment of social grants had been in operation for about 20 months. Sassa and CPS asserted that the system was running smoothly and efficiently and setting the tender aside would cause great disruption. The court required a further hearing to determine a just and equitable remedy in light of the potential disruptions, which would affect millions of people. After the second hearing, it ordered that the tender process be rerun. In initiating and implementing a new tender process, the order emphasised that there must be no disruption to the payment of existing social grants. During the period of suspension, the court held that CPS’s contract with Sassa should remain in force given its constitutional and contractual obligations to maintain a workable payment system. Although the order required that there be a new tender process, the court recognised that the decision on the proposed final solution lay with Sassa. To ensure effective monitoring, accountability and impartiality, the court imposed a structural interdict requiring Sassa to report back to it at each crucial stage of the new tender process. It also mandated that new members of the bid evaluation and bid adjudication committees be appointed. It is important to note that the court does not order structural interdicts often. Structural orders are an effective tool to ensure that a remedy obtained against an organ of state by a litigant is implemented within a reasonable time, as often they involve important issues of public interest such as the payment of grants, which need to be resolved expeditiously. The parties had negotiated a draft order that set out a timetable for the completion of the tender rerun process that the court made an order of court. The court added a paragraph to the order specifying that only the court may be approached for further relief, in which event the interests of beneficiaries would be paramount in deciding whether or not to entertain the application. However, in its progress report filed with the Constitutional Court dated October 15 2015, Sassa stated that it had decided not to award the tender after it had rerun the process. Sassa explained that its plan had always been for it to "take over the control, administration and management of payment of the social grants by 2017, when the contract with CPS expires". Declaration Suspended The Constitutional Court’s order stated that if the tender was not awarded, the declaration of invalidity of the contract would be further suspended until completion of the five-year period for which the contract was awarded. In a court order dated November 25 2015, the court concluded that the progress report complied with its structural order and that its supervisory jurisdiction should be discharged. That was the end of the court’s oversight, but it was only the beginning stage of the current crisis. Sassa knew from October 2015, at the very least, that it wanted to take over control and administration of social grants and yet in that time, it failed to come up with a final solution, as it had guaranteed the court. There are reports that Sassa has negotiated a two-year contract with CPS. The agency has approached the Constitutional Court, asking it to validate this two-year contract so that grants can be paid on April 1. The court finds itself in a difficult position, where once again, it must do what is best for the beneficiaries of social grants, while at the same time ensuring it is not seen to be endorsing a constitutionally invalid contract. The proposed two-year contract between CPS and Sassa is contrary to the values of fairness, equitability, transparency, competitiveness and cost-effectiveness that the Constitution demands when the state contracts for goods. In principle, when contracting for goods, the government should "shop around" and attract the maximum number of potential contractors to participate in a tender process, because public money should be spent in an effective and efficient manner. The regulations of the Public Finance Management Act provide, in general terms, for deviation from a competitive process in emergencies where immediate action is necessary, for example. However, self-created emergencies are not considered a justification for a deviation from a tender process. Considering the disruptions that will be caused if the contract extension is found to be invalid, the court may have to validate the negotiated contract between Sassa and CPS, but perhaps for a shorter period than the proposed two years. The court should also impose another structural interdict forcing Sassa to report back to the court periodically to keep it and the public apprised of the steps the agency is taking towards a workable final solution. These recent events are a reminder to lawyers that we often deal with live ammunition. The cases that come across our desks often provide intellectual stimulation, but we sometimes forget the real-life consequences legal interventions such as the court’s AllPay judgment can have for those whose only priority is survival. • Xaso is an attorney at ENSafrica in Johannesburg. She writes in her personal capacity