The travails at state-owned petroleum firm PetroSA demonstrate in graphic form why it&rsquo;s so important to separate state functions from risk-based enterprises.Although the calamitous financial failure of the company has been known for some time, the parliamentary portfolio committee on energy was on Tuesday formally told about the persisting dimensions of the disaster.The short version of this long and tortuous history is that the gas-to-fuel company essentially ran out of feedstock a few years ago and it consequently took a massive bet on finding new gas fields. This effort, the failed Ikhwezi ocean-gas project, resulted in a breathtaking R15bn loss in 2016. On top of that, the energy committee was told of a further R1.1bn impairment for the current 2016-17 financial year. In total, the loss is the biggest yet recorded for a state-owned enterprise.Following the Ikhwezi disaster, a forensic report was commissioned and it found that although there may have been some irregularities and possibly even some outright bribery, the essential problem was technical. The investment decisions were taken on insufficient technical information and then management instability further undermined the project. The well-drilling project for liquefied natural gas yielded only 10% of the gas expected.Amazingly, this disaster did not stop several senior managers from getting bonuses and golden handshakes, which Petro SA has consistently claimed were never linked to company performance, but were paid as part of its skills retention scheme. With a track record like this, you have to ask why PetroSA would not have been better served by not retaining their services.Faced with this disaster, PetroSA has rapidly been trying to discover a new narrative that would keep the enterprise within the safe arms of a benevolent government. The latest tactic is to try to present itself as the basis for a state-owned oil company that would manage the "free carry" that would flow from new licences issued to private sector oil companies.The only problem is that it&rsquo;s not known whether SA has oil and gas deposits rich enough to attract serious oil firms to drill. Also, its oil policy is weighted so heavily towards the state and black economic empowerment; serious international oil companies have been conspicuous in their absence.The great irony is that PetroSA&rsquo;s private sector comparator Sasol has been a remarkable success since it was weaned off government subsidies in 1997. In that year, its total income was R15bn and its profits were about R2.5bn. Its turnover is now R173bn and its profits about R14bn. Even allowing for inflation, this is a remarkable achievement.The difference demonstrates how valuable it is not only for the taxpayers but also to government to leave risk-based enterprises to the private sector and not to try to establish government agencies to compete with them, except in exceptional circumstances. Politicians are often entranced by the idea of creating state enterprises that would operate in the public space on the basis that these enterprises are owned by the nation and would therefore pursue national goals as opposed to chasing profit.The problem is that it seldom if ever works out that way. By tying the enterprises function to national goals, they are inevitably hobbled and struggle to compete with their private sector counterparts. Management is often selected for political reasons and their accountability tends to be linked to their political connections rather than their function within the enterprise.The disaster that is PetroSA is a perfect illustration of this tendency and it ought to be sufficient evidence to let well alone &ndash; although, sadly, it probably won&rsquo;t.