The Australian Rugby Union (ARU) has moved to deny a media report that alleged Perth-based Western Force would be cut from the embattled Super Rugby competition. Australia’s News Ltd reported late on Monday that the Force would be one of the teams cut from the 18-team tournament, prompting the franchise to release a statement, declaring it pure speculation. The ARU also said no decision had been made on cutting any of Australia’s five sides from the competition, which includes teams from New Zealand, SA, Japan and Argentina. "At this point, there has been no determination on the future competition format or the teams involved in the competition," the ARU said. "We also wish to confirm for the public record that no decision has been taken on the removal of one of Australia’s Super Rugby teams." The ARU is a joint venture partner in the tournament’s governing body Sanzaar with the rugby unions from New Zealand, SA and Argentina. The ARU has declined to express any support for Australia to keep five teams in the tournament since a Sanzaar meeting in London earlier in March, fuelling speculation at least one team will be cut. Media reports in Australia and SA have alleged that the competition will be cut back to 15 teams in 2018 after the expansion to 18 teams in 2016 was widely blamed for creating inequity in the playoffs and diluting the quality of the rugby. The Force earlier issued a strongly worded statement, rejecting the News Ltd media report. "Under no circumstances do we believe ... speculation around the future of the Force to be true," the team said. "Two-and-a-half weeks ago, through a national phone link-up, all clubs were told that the ARU, through the governing body, Sanzaar, was investigating a number of issues and those issues had to be resolved prior to a decision being made to reduce any of the Australian franchises. There has been no further contact from the ARU to any of the Western Force players or staff, so at this time, there is no further comment." Founded in 2006, the Force have struggled to gain a foothold on and off the pitch in a part of Australia far removed from rugby union’s eastern heartland. The ARU had to bail the franchise out in 2016 to the tune of $2.29m. They face the Auckland Blues on Saturday. Reuters