London — Rhodium’s on the best run in a decade on the expectation of more demand for the material that is used in cleaning toxic car emissions. One of the rarest precious metals, it has climbed over the past seven months and is up 19% in 2017, outperforming most major commodities. Mostly used alongside palladium in petrol autocatalysts, prices have rebounded from a 12-year low set in July. The spectacular turnaround comes amid stronger demand from industrial users, including car makers, which account for the bulk of rhodium consumption. China, which predominantly favours petrol vehicles, in December raised a sales tax on small cars less than originally expected. In 2016, Chinese consumers bought vehicles at the fastest pace in three years. "China is a big part of this story," said Jonathan Butler, a precious metals strategist at Mitsubishi Corporation in London. "The level of car ownership is still growing, and there are signs that it could get to Western levels." The metal is trading at $920/oz, according to Johnson Matthey, which makes about a third of all autocatalysts. This year’s advance compares with a 13% gain for palladium and an 8% increase for platinum, which is also used to curb car emissions. All three metals are mined together, mainly in SA. One way to buy rhodium is through an exchange-traded product started by Standard Bank in late 2015. Money managers accounted for most purchases in the fund and private investors made up the rest, said Johann Erasmus, who oversees the fund. The product’s assets total about 46,650oz, he said. That is about 5% of total annual demand. Because rhodium was a smaller market than other precious metals, prices were more volatile, said Grant Sporre, an analyst at Deutsche Bank in London. The metal surged almost 23-fold from 2003 to 2008, when it touched a record $10,100. "There’s currently no reason to expect falling prices in the short or medium term," Heraeus Metals Germany GmbH & Company said in a report e-mailed Monday. Bloomberg