SA’s current account deficit narrowed to 1.7% of gross domestic product during the fourth quarter of 2016, from 3.8%, exceeding expectations as exports outpaced import growth. The head of the Reserve Bank's balance of payments division, Linda Motsumi, said this was the most significant lowering of the deficit on a quarterly basis in several years. The deficit slipped below 1.7% for five consecutive quarters between late 2010 and early 2011. But Motsumi, speaking on Wednesday at a release of the Bank’s first quarterly bulletin for the year, doubted whether the improvement in the deficit at the current level was sustainable. "Whether we’ll see levels of 1.7% of GDP going forward, I’m not quite sure about that." The narrowing of the deficit exceeded market expectations ahead of Wednesday’s presentation. Investec had forecast a deficit of 2.7% of GDP, while Standard Bank’s was closer, at 1.9% of GDP. The value of merchandise exports grew by 3.7% in the three months to the end of December 2016 as the value of mining products exported rose and more than offset a drop in the value of after a decline of 6.4% in the third quarter of last year. Motsumi said imports in 2016 were muted and reflected "very subdued growth", while exports lifted and commodity prices rebounded. She said continued improvement in commodity prices would improve earnings from exports. For 2016 as a whole, the deficit narrowed to 3.3% of GDP from 4.4% a year earlier. The trade balance swung from a deficit of R7bn in the third quarter of 2016 to a surplus of R56bn in the last quarter of the year, as domestic producers recorded higher earnings from exports. This was boosted by increased foreign demand for South African manufactured goods and higher prices of selected commodities. However, domestic demand for imports slowed during the three months to December. Demand eased for the second consecutive quarter. On an annual basis the trade balance improved to a surplus of R15bn in 2016 from a deficit of R38bn in 2015. This reflected the narrowing in the trade deficits with Europe and Asia and a widening trade surplus with Africa, the Reserve Bank said. At the same time, the shortfall on the services, income and current transfer account shrank from R159bn in the third quarter last year to R132bn by the end of the year. The Bank attributed this to an improvement in the net income deficit, which means that foreign dividends from abroad increased sharply. But this is also affected by changes in dividend payments to nonresidents, which determine the size of the deficit on the overall current account. Dividend payments to nonresidents contracted marginally, by nearly 1.5%, in 2016 following a gradual loss of momentum after 2011. This is the first annual contraction in dividend payments to nonresidents since the 2008-09 global financial recession. "Generally slow or negative growth in dividend payments is associated with sluggish growth in real gross domestic product," the central bank said. Dividend payments are affected by "push factors" where the dividends are driven by company profits, which are affected by economic growth. "Pull factors" reflect the liquidity needs of parent companies or major shareholders abroad.