The SABC’s attempts to pin the blame for its financial crisis on negative publicity from parliamentary hearings are contradicted by its own internal documents. On Thursday the SABC acknowledged for the first time that it faced a financial crisis. This is one of the key issues that the interim board will have to grapple with when it is appointed later in March. A statement issued by spokesman Kaizer Kganyago warned of imminent financial collapse and looming retrenchments if alternative sources of funding were not found. The broadcaster blamed its financial woes on a lack of government funding and its "negative portrayal" during parliamentary hearings. It also implicitly blamed the hearings for hobbling former chief operating officer Hlaudi Motsoeneng’s efforts to rescue the SABC from ruin. This is contradicted by internal documents from the SABC’s finance division seen by Business Day. They show management was warned of the looming crisis during an SABC treasury and risk committee meeting on June 21 2016. The parliamentary ad hoc committee inquiry kicked off five months later. An e-mail referring to the risk committee meeting pointed out that the SABC treasury had approached banks in April 2016 to seek bridging finance of more than R1bn. It is understood the initiative never went further because the national Treasury was unlikely to guarantee the loans. The e-mail warned that long-term forecasts were "not favourable". Cash balances had been "negatively affected by the economic climate as well as the impact of the various strategic changes initiated this year". On Monday, Business Day reported that another internal finance document showed the SABC’s cash reserves had plummeted to R174m in December, from over R1bn in 2015. The documents stressed the SABC needed R650m in the bank to meet monthly operational expenses. The SABC has not commented on the internal documents. Thursday’s concession by Kganyago stands in stark contrast to the SABC’s repeated assurances to Parliament and the auditor-general that it remained on a sound financial footing. Acting CEO James Aguma told Parliament on February 28 that the SABC’s financial performance was "satisfactory". He did so despite being in possession of an internal report from his finance division showing that the SABC was about to run out of cash. The parliamentary inquiry blamed the SABC board and management for the crisis. Former board members and executives told the inquiry how Motsoeneng and Aguma abused their power to commit the broadcaster to dubious deals, paid tens of millions of rand to consultants who duplicated work done in-house, and implemented a 90% local content policy without considering the impact on advertising revenues. The inquiry’s final report also strongly criticised the SABC for refusing to supply it with documents related to these deals, citing commercial sensitivity. On Thursday, Kganyago attempted to turn the tables on the inquiry. "The utterances made by various individuals and organisations at the ad hoc committee have negatively portrayed the SABC and this has had an adverse impact on the revenues of the SABC in the form of payment of TV licences, advertising spend and the withdrawal of strategic partners who were engaged to finance additional channels that the SABC intended to launch in preparation for digital terrestrial television," he said. Motsoeneng had been in advanced discussions to raise money from "strategic partnerships" with provincial governments and the private sector to fund these. Motsoeneng’s initiative had been "negatively compromised from October 2016 with these planned revenues not being realised". Kganyago said that the government’s 2% contribution to the SABC’s total revenue was "minuscule in comparison to the cost". It receives 85% of revenue from advertising and sponsorship and 12% from licence fees. "As a result, the SABC cautioned that the collapse of its finances was imminent if due care was not exercised in dealing with the confidentiality of contracts with its strategic partners," Kganyago said. The Broadcasting, Electronic, Media & Allied Workers Union criticised the SABC for "playing the victim" and "trying to shift the blame to others while they themselves are solely to blame for the sorry state the SABC finds itself in".