Parliament’s finance committee has held two full days of public hearings on the banks and plans a third in May. The industry’s worst fear — that this was an invitation to a mugging — has not been realised. While there was a chance, and perhaps there still is a small one, that the process could get so noisy and uncontrollable it could damage investor confidence in the banks and economy, the tone of the hearings was, by and large, constructive. What is still not clear is what the committee, in particular its ANC contingent, hopes to achieve through the process. Chairman Yunus Carrim says the motivation for the hearing came most directly from the overhaul of financial regulation in which the committee is involved to implement the new Twin Peaks framework. He says the committee has realised that if it were to develop a point of view on regulation, which took into consideration the country’s wider political and developmental goals, it needed to better appraise itself of the state of the sector and prepare to make a contribution. So, for instance, in processing one of the first Twin Peaks bills — the Financial Sector Regulation Bill — it became evident, he says, that one of the unintended consequences of tighter regulation would be to make it more difficult for new entrants to come into the sector. This raises transformation questions, about which the committee is rightfully concerned. As with the economy more generally, transformation of the financial services sector is a critical foundation for the future to which business in SA has willingly signed up. At the same time there have been less savoury calls for "transformation" that arose out of the campaign to stop the closure of the Gupta family’s bank accounts. From the same quarters have come objections to enhanced due diligence of politically exposed people. The committee did well in not blurring these two quite disparate agendas. What outcomes can be expected from the parliamentary process? At the end of it all, a report will be produced. One tangible outcome will be support for a state-owned bank as well as for co-operative banks. This is not new. Regardless of the committee’s deliberations, both will still face the same difficulties and problems in getting off the ground. There may be some recommendations around regulation and curbing the worst abuses of banks — such as the repossession of homes — although this does not fall within the ambit of the committee. Most importantly, though, it is expected that the committee will come to its own view on the state of transformation of the sector. Some very different statistics have been thrown at it from various quarters. Banks paint a picture of targets – for example in black ownership – largely achieved; the Black Economic Empowerment Commission, which is part of the Department of Trade and Industry, says the opposite. Much of this debate has already taken place in industry and government forums where a new draft of the Financial Sector Charter sits ready on Trade and Industry Minister Rob Davies’s desk for publication. It is possible that the committee could recommend the immediate revisiting of the new charter, given the various perceptions of what has been achieved and what is possible and desirable. This will again put the definition of black ownership (which at present allows for indirect ownership to be counted) and the principle of once empowered, always empowered back on the table for debate. For those by now weary of the continual shifting of the transformation goalposts, this will be regarded as a negative development, but it will be one with which the industry has no choice but to engage.