Poverty is an academic exercise for some, but a practical reality for most. Into the fray, toss the price of booze – the lubricant that is our salve and damned salvation. After all, stiff times call for a stiff dop. This makes the increase in "sin taxes" in February’s budget – on alcohol and tobacco – that more ignominious. Where’s the empathy, Pravin? You should be pouring the drinks, not hiding them under the bar. Yet, there might be a way to squeeze a few drops of life out of this after all, much like Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan did with his budget. For, while the papsak (the plastic wine-filled gut of a box wine, sold sans box) was outlawed several years ago, the humble dooswyn (box wine) — or "Bellville briefcase" — has retained its shelf space in our favourite stores. Papsakkies were also known on Cape farms as "blink toekoms" (bright future) — a reference to their silvery surface and the promise of lifting you from your immediate troubles. A five-litre papsakkie could change the world, and did for many, for better and for far, far worse. The tot system in terms of which farmers would apportion wine at regular intervals throughout the day to workers, has left us a legacy of foetal alcohol spectrum disorder, domestic violence, abuse and death that is the envy only of the very dankest corners of hell. At a liquor conference I once happened upon, there was a proud presentation on this very thing: products aimed at "social transformers". No, we’re not talking community workers or cultural activists, but groups of people who habitually drink together to change their sense of crushing reality. The gall of these marketing monsters was astounding. Someone has to do it, so why not us, was their logic. Like being a lawyer for President Jacob Zuma, I guess. Many of us are social transformers these days, imbibing to soothe the nerves, because there are plenty of things that cause a little stress. What should we do about the government, crime, education and the economy? Drink them away! So what to drink? A wine merchant acquaintance did a blind tasting with friends recently. Everyone brought a bottle that cost less than R50. He sneaked one in that cost about R300. No one could taste the difference, obviously. So if the stuff you get from a box of wine is as good as the stuff you get from a cheap bottle, why not switch, when price, convenience and quality are the factors involved? There are some advantages professional boozehounds could consider. If you arrive at your neighbours with a full box of wine for a quick uninvited meal, you can always take the remains home. There are also no clinky (and breakable) glass bottles that are downed in the blink of an eye. Box wines provide volume, saving multiple trips to the liquor store. That vaguely spiteful feeling that arises when you deliver a distinguished bottle to a dinner party and watch as everyone receives a large glass, empties the bottle and abandons you to their putrid plonk for the rest of the evening is always avoided with box wine. You stick with your own — and can share if you wish. The Robertson stuff is good enough, except the chardonnay is chardonnay and the chenin is weirdly acrid. Their "light" white (low-kilojoule and less alcohol. but still a sturdy 9.5%) is completely drinkable. I’m not sure how much box wine one is legally allowed to have open at any one time. When you’re nurturing a three-litre Two Oceans Sauvignon Blanc over several evenings at home (crisp and well-balanced fruit on the nose, as they say, and R99.95 at my local), no one knows how much you’re drinking except you, which can be a very useful thing. When full, these friendly boxes release their contents with appreciable pressure. They offer the adventurous the ravishing prospect of placing one’s mouths directly below the faucet to imbibe in a satisfying primeval manner. Bottles, with their feeble gloop-gloop sounds, simply pale in comparison. The Woolworths dooswyn has a see-through lung so you can see exactly how much remains. It’s like finding out the sex of your unborn baby and naming it before it arrives, denying one of the last mysteries in life. Most, however, are silver, offering an element of mystery. It’s great fun to disembowel the box when there are only a few drops left and inflate the inner sheath to full size in order to blast out the last drops into your glass and then let the children kick it around the garden, or throw against the neighbour’s electric fence. I also enjoy rocking the box to and fro with an open faucet when it is down to the dregs, letting it inhale deeply and then exhale into my glass in diminishing spurts. My sister has proven there’s always another glass left if you cut the corner of the inflatable membrane and let the remainder dribble into a glass. You can use the leftover cardboard for craft projects or making fires. The carbon footprint of box wine is low, for those who care to think about such things. Glass is expensive and quickly fills the recycling box. Dooswyn is neat and tidy. Shlurp, finish, rip apart, fold away, recycle. When active, these receptacles also make much better use of fridge space, for those who can still afford to buy groceries. Yes, it’s always great to enjoy a fine bottle of wine. But they’re expensive. And that’s the beauty of the box. Like all assets, it’s about diversification. Drinking from the box means the bottle stays alive, as a welcome treat for special occasions. Like the appointment of a new deputy finance minister, maybe? That would call for a whole case, I’m afraid. Maybe even the legal kind.