Addis Ababa — At least 48 people, 15 of them children, were killed in a landslide at a huge rubbish dump on the outskirts of Addis Ababa, Ethiopia’s capital. Hundreds of people live on the 50-year-old dump, the city’s only landfill site, scavenging for food and items they can sell such as recyclable metal. City spokesperson Amare Mekonen said efforts were under way to find people still missing since the landslide late on Saturday, which destroyed 49 dwellings and put 28 people in hospital. "In a bid to prevent such things happening again, people who were living in this area have now been taken to youth centres in other parts of the city," he said. Squatters living there blamed the tragedy on a biogas plant being built nearby. Musa Suleiman Abdulah, who lost his wooden shack, said he heard "a big sound". "When we came out, something like a tornado was rushing at us. We started to collect family members. People helped. My child and family left before the destruction." Streets in the neighbourhood below were filled with women sobbing and wailing. People said shack dwellers were trapped under mounds of rubbish, construction materials, sticks and plastic sheeting but police were stopping them from approaching the site. Just six people were seen digging through the rubbish on Sunday looking for survivors and bodies. could be seen in the wreckage. Ibrahim Mohammed, a day labourer living at the landfill whose house was narrowly spared destruction, said the disaster happened in "three minutes". He thought that more than 300 people lived on the landfill. For more than 40 years the Koshe site has been the main rubbish dump for Addis Ababa, a rapidly growing city of about 4-million people. According to local residents, about 50 houses with about seven people living in each of them were built on the rubbish. People had built the houses about two to three years ago, said Berhanu Degefe, a rubbish collector who lives at the dump but whose home was not destroyed. "Their livelihood depends on the trash. They collect from here and they live here," Degefe said, referring to the victims and other squatters. "This part, all of it went down," he said, gesturing at a huge chunk of the hill that suddenly slid. "A lot of people died last night." Degefe blamed the collapse on a new biogas plant being constructed on top of the hill. An AFP journalist saw bulldozers on top of the hill pushing piles of rubbish around. Degefe said they were levelling ground for the plant, increasing pressure on the hillside and causing the collapse. Mohammed also blamed the biogas plant construction for the tragedy, saying trash had been compressed and the landslide happened "because a lot of garbage is dumped on the top level" and "pressed ... down". The journalist also saw cracks in the ground at the top of the hill, suggesting that more of the pile could slide. Koshe, whose name means "dirt" in local slang, was closed last year by city authorities who asked people to move to a new dump site outside Addis Ababa. But the community there did not want the landfill, and so the rubbish collectors moved back. Poverty and food insecurity are sensitive issues in Ethiopia, which was hit by a famine in 1984-85 after extreme drought. In recent years, the country has been one of Africa’s top-performing economies and a magnet for foreign investment, with growth in near-double digits and huge infrastructure investment. Still, nearly 20-million Ethiopians live below the poverty line set by the World Bank. Critics have hit out at the government’s economic policies saying they have a limited trickle-down effect from the elite down to the majority of the people. Reuters and AFP