The problems facing SA in the post-apartheid era have always been obvious: structurally high unemployment and inequality and poverty. And the policy response imperatives have also been very obvious: sustainable labour intensive and inclusive growth strategy and policy. The philosophical conviction to pursue such a strategy and policy was wired into the DNA of the ANC as it prepared to assume power following the transition negotiations. The shape and state of the economy inherited by the ANC-led government dictated a need to ensure sustained and shared economic growth to deal effectively with the challenges of structural unemployment inequality and poverty. But the reality we have experienced is that economic growth has been consistently low, and below the targets set in all the government’s growth plans. The blame has often been attributed to external and global exigencies on which we had very little control. But this has been a deflective excuse rather than the whole truth. The fundamental question we must now ask is whether the ANC had any credible growth policy that was also decidedly labour-intensive and inclusive. I have always thought the ANC-led government has never in reality had such a policy and it is time to say so without equivocation. A review of research and academic material on this topic reveals a reluctance to make such a bold pronouncement. The line of thinking by many contributors on this issue has been to draw attention to shortcomings of the current growth policies and how they have failed to deliver the types of jobs that the large numbers of our unemployed labour force need. I am also guilty of this temptation in my Op-Ed’s in the past (Growth failure punctures employment, Business Day, November 28 2016). Confronted with the economy that was in crisis at the beginning of the transition period, the ANC-led government has over time introduced a series of growth strategies to deal with the challenges. First, it was the Reconstruction and Development Plan (RPD) in 1994, designed to provide some degree of macroeconomic stability at the onset of transition. This was followed by Growth, Employment and Redistribution (GEAR) in 1996, criticised as opening the door for the ANC’s current neoliberal economic policy. The central theme of a market-led economic policy within the framework of fiscal discipline and macroeconomic stability underpinned GEAR and is a central feature of all the other ANC growth policies: the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa (AsgiSA) of 2007; the Industrial Policy Action Plan of 2009, as revised; the New Growth Path of 2010; and the National Development Plan of 2012. A comparative review by Prof David Kaplan of the University of Cape Town reveals that there are inherent contradictory assumptions on the constraints hindering growth in SA. All these plans have failed to trigger the pace of growth needed to solve our socioeconomic problems and as a result we are stuck in a low-growth trap. The dominant philosophy and paradigm in the ruling tripartite alliance was, and continues to be, one that advocated the use of government resources and policies to achieve high (decent) wage and high value-added forms of production. The rationale was that this strategy would trigger fast growth that would create decent jobs and decent wages and positively affect the informal sector. The key driver for creating jobs was to be the private sector and, therefore, creating an environment that would attract private sector investment was a key component of this strategy. However, the labour market liberalisation package that was a critical component of both the GEAR and NDP to support this growth trajectory has never materialised. This is the shortcoming that has dogged all these plans, and Cosatu was behind it. The reality is that in what little growth that has occurred, formal jobs were created that benefited organised labour, while the owners of capital benefited immensely from improved margins as a result of technology-supported high value-added forms of production. Nobody was speaking on behalf of the unemployed and unskilled labour force and they were left out of the loop. Informal and low-wage jobs in the retail manufacturing sector were decimated as the economy became more globalised. In addition, the tightening of the wage-setting regime directly eroded labour intensive production. Lower-wage, labour-intensive companies were driven out of business by a system that allowed trade unions, large employers and the minister of labour to set wages that were compulsory across the industry irrespective of the harm they caused. The NDP has identified the need for average annual growth of more than 5% between 2012 and 2030 in order to meet its targets of eliminating poverty and reducing inequality, primarily by creating 11-million new jobs. However, annual growth has since barely ever touched 3%, and has been slowing over the past few years to about 1%. The result is that our economy is considerably smaller now than the NDP would have hoped, and the average growth rate needed to achieve the NDP’s target for the size of the economy by 2030 is now above 6% a year. More importantly, the failure of the economy to grow means many social policies championed in the NDP and by government, appear increasingly unaffordable The inescapable conclusion is that the ANC-led government was indeed motivated by a rational political philosophy in developing all these strategies. However, they failed to rein in the influence of Cosatu and the SACP and ended up with less than successful growth policies. What is interesting is that the rhetoric for "labour-intensive" and "radical economic transformation" has dominated the ANC policy pronouncements for the past decade. Yet the facts point to a different reality. The challenge that has always confronted the ANC and undermined its ability to construct solid and consistent policies is its organisational structure. Its broad nature requires a strongman-type leader to ensure alignment on a chosen policy track. During the liberation struggle, when it was focused on one objective, control of such a structure was relatively easy. In the democratic era where contestation of ideas is the norm, the task has become far more complicated and complex. Thabo Mbeki was the closest to the strongman leader needed but since his removal, the party has been adrift on all fronts. It will need to be liberated from the tripartite alliance to regain its ability to govern effectively. Economic policy operates in a very complex environment. It requires the management of a number of interdependent strategic factors to achieve the desired outcome. An inclusive growth strategy would need success on other policy fronts to achieve the intended outcomes. Failures in the critical and complementary areas of quality education, viable primary healthcare, low infrastructure investment and poor rollout, poor leadership of state-owned enterprises, weak support for the small and medium enterprise sector, and consistently low foreign direct investment, have hobbled efforts to achieve the growth rates we need. These fault lines require a very strong centre for policy co-ordination and monitoring. For it to be successful, such a centre must be led by, and populated with, people of very high integrity and credibility, and with a broad profile of expertise and competencies to provide sound advice on policy implementation. It must also have reasonable independence to carry weight and respect. This model has been tried with success in other countries. These initiatives on the side of the political economy will achieve little unless the private sector plays its critical role in coming up with credible strategies to transform the economy to make it more inclusive and achieve equity in its profile. Commitment in this area has been dismally lacking and failure to act does not bode well for stability and social transformation. • Motsohi is an organisational strategist at Lenomo Strategy Advisory.