Who would have thought it? The Federal Reserve hikes US interest rates and the rand heads to its best levels in 19 months. The only one of 150 currencies that advanced by more than the rand on Thursday, after the Fed decision, was the Seychelles rupee, Bloomberg reported. It was a very far cry from the "taper tantrum", which crashed the rand and other emerging market currencies in 2013, when the Fed first announced its intention to start normalising monetary policy. But the world has changed since then and so has the Fed, which has lately been managing expectations much more effectively than it used to. The 25-basis-point rate hike it opted for on Wednesday, which was only the third in the hiking cycle that began in December 2015, was widely expected. It had been almost 100% priced in by the market, which was waiting only to see what the Fed said, rather than what it did. The US economic recovery is now well under way. The global financial crisis damaged the growth potential of all the world’s big economies. And even though the US economy is growing at a rate that may look relatively modest, it is close to full employment and the growth rate is at or close to potential — in other words, it is reaching its speed limit and if it grows any faster, the economy will start to generate inflation. That’s why the Fed is raising rates, in an effort to put a lid on inflationary pressures. Economists were already expecting three rate increases in 2017. The question going into the Fed’s open market committee meeting on Wednesday was whether the Fed might be looking at more than three. There was particular concern about whether the Fed might feel it had fallen behind the curve and might have to raise rates faster. Had Fed chairwoman Janet Yellen made hawkish noises, markets could have reacted quite sharply, with the prospect of much higher US interest rates driving the dollar higher and prompting a shift out of risk assets, such as commodities and emerging market currencies. In the event, Yellen came across as charmingly dove-ish, and the praise was fulsome. "This was the best scenario, because the Fed was confident enough to hike … but it doesn’t sound in the mood to take away the punch bowl," said one commentator. "This is going to be a friendly, docile, dovish hiking cycle," said another. The unknown unknown is what US President Donald Trump’s economic policies will turn out to be. He has made lots of noise about economic stimulus packages involving big infrastructure investments on the spending side and big tax cuts on the revenue side. If those stimuli come to pass, they would boost an economy that is already at full speed and the Fed could be forced to look at something more hawkish. Meanwhile, however, there’s been a growing view in the market that Trump, who is taking a very long time to make key appointments and whose speedy actions in areas such as immigration have already run aground, might prove to be a much more ineffectual president than expected. That view is one of the factors that has helped to drive the recent strong rally in emerging market assets, including the rand. Another is that China is seen stabilising in 2017, with its leadership determined to keep it on an even keel even though the underlying risks to its financial system and the sustainability of its economic growth rate are still there. The China factor has helped to boost commodity prices — another positive for the rand and for the economy. Ironically then, despite our fractious politics and the continued threat of a ratings downgrade, the rand is up. That should help with SA’s own inflation rate and should put to bed any thoughts of further interest rate hikes in SA.