Does your favourite celebrity influence your spending habits? If he or she raves on social media about a new perfume, food or fashion item, do you rush out and buy it? If the answer is yes, don’t be embarrassed. Millions, perhaps billions, of people do this. It takes only one product mention from Kim Kardashian to elicit more than a million likes — which probably translates into thousands of purchases. But how would you feel if the celebrity is paid to tweet or blog about a love for the product but wouldn’t be seen dead wearing it? Would you feel cheated? For broadcast, print, billboards or online, South African advertising is strictly governed in terms of what it can claim and how it can claim it. However, there is a grey area on what is called the "social media influencer". Kelly Thompson, a partner at law firm Adams & Adams, says influencers are paid by brands to promote products "either in money or in kind". For example, clothing brands will give free goods to celebrities or fashion bloggers "in the expectation that they will post photographs on social media of themselves wearing the items … with an appropriate mention of the brand". Thompson says that in the US, the Federal Trade Commission published guidelines requiring that any material connection between an advertiser and endorser "must be disclosed in a clear and conspicuous manner". Sponsored mentions must be identified with a hashtag such as #sponsored or #advertisement. In SA, there are no rules insisting that celebrities declare their interest. Odette van der Haar, CEO of the Association for Communication and Advertising, which represents the advertising industry, says: "It is not a legislated requirement and influencers may choose to announce or not. "For the more respected influencers, it is often the case that they will announce it. This, however, is generally restricted to their blogs or their websites. In terms of social media and particularly Twitter and Instagram, the relationship is seldom announced." Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) legal affairs head Fred Makgato says: "I think we have fallen behind a little in this respect." He is unaware of the ASA having received any complaints about undeclared endorsements, he says. Thompson says definitions in the Consumer Protection Act and the ASA Code of Advertising Practice allow for the setting of standards. Broad advertising definitions within the act and ASA code would probably apply to social media. "When bloggers or influencers post on social media in relation to an advertiser’s products or services, those posts could also be regarded as advertisements because they are intended to market, promote, advertise or publicise the advertiser or the relevant goods or services," she says. "Accordingly, this would also require compliance with the act and the ASA code." The Consumer Protection Act requires advertising to be conducted "in a fair and reasonable manner" with "no misrepresentations". The ASA code demands "truthfulness and honesty". It requires that advertisements should be clearly distinguishable as such, whatever their form and whatever the medium used. Thompson says SA will eventually have to follow the US’s lead and insist that influencers — and the brands that sponsor them — disclose their relationships. "The bottom line is that consumers have a right to know when somethingis a paid-for testimonial rather than the personal and unbiased view of the endorser."