As we watch the very public fight for the soul of the DA, how atuned are we to the less overt but more important fight for the country&rsquo;s soul?I&rsquo;m not sure how many people would miss Helen Zille&rsquo;s (combative, principled, cerebral) style of politicking; I&rsquo;m pretty certain though that we&rsquo;ll do ourselves serious harm if we miss the point of her latest provocation.The majority view among my (left-liberal) friends is that the premier messed up badly by saying that colonialism was not unqualifiedly awful. They believe, and it&rsquo;s probably true, that this conclusion will offend a large number of black people and so have a serious adverse impact on her party&rsquo;s electoral prospects. The tweets were demeaning and hurtful, they insist, and her axing or resignation is the only way to prevent large-scale voter estrangement.The practical logic is plain, in a party set on power. What also needs to be considered, though, is the effect of this blood-letting on the national political dialogue. A fractured country such as ours needs high levels of sensitivity from its political leaders, but what it also needs are high levels of frankness and integrity from its public intellectuals. There&rsquo;s been scant evidence of that in the commentary thus far.Instead, what we&rsquo;ve seen, from across the progressive spectrum, is a barrage of abuse, none of it engaging the substance of Zille&rsquo;s analysis. She&rsquo;s been compared with Verwoerd, no less, and David Duke, despite a lifelong fight against racist injustice. And she&rsquo;s been accused of idealising colonialism and apartheid, although the words she used point the other way.At worst, what the offending texts actually conveyed was that for all the obvious suffering it caused, the European colonial project did have a certain upside. Given her background and record, it is preposterous to aver that Zille is blind to the catalogue of horrors visited on the continent; the killing, the enslaving, the exploiting,Casting Zille as a white supremacist or an apologist for colonialism is an egregious calumny. She didn&rsquo;t begin to exonerate the conquerors, she simply noted (albeit clumsily) that in the course of their selfish and baleful project, they did introduce some amenities, programmes and ideas that have been to the benefit of Africa&rsquo;s indigenous populace &mdash; allopathic medicines, electrification, tarred roads and so on.There was no implication that these advances couldn&rsquo;t have been availed without conquest and subjection; that they might not have been intuited and developed by the locals themselves in time; that reparations aren&rsquo;t due; or even that African life today is demonstrably better than before colonialism (though I&rsquo;d be surprised if more than a small fraction of its 1-billion citizens would forego their modern comforts).My main concern &mdash; Zille&rsquo;s too, surely &mdash; is the need to be (very) wary of pathologising whiteness (or Europeanness, or westernism). It is eminently possible to recognise past wrongs (and the need to put them right) and also celebrate blackness, but to do so without encouraging the belief that everything white people have built or own is unworthy.Zille&rsquo;s blast, written under the influence of Lee Kuan Yew (and maybe jet lag), had two major themes. One, that there was a silver lining to the dark colonial cloud (mass literacy, the rule of law, telecoms and so on) and two that, as Singapore&rsquo;s history has shown, it is possible for a society to move from poverty to prosperity in a few generations. What she might also have pointed out, if she&rsquo;d been pushed rather than pummelled, is firstly that we know from history (and logic) that collisions between technologically unequal civilisations invariably end in domination and subjection (if not annihilation); and secondly that the path of muscular rejectionism doesn&rsquo;t lead to a good place (see Zimbabwe).I&rsquo;m not saying the tweets were tactically smart or optimally framed. I am saying they&rsquo;re important to consider more carefully, because they represent a reaction, and a rebuke, to the crude populist rhetoric of people such as Julius "Circumspection" Malema, Collen Maine and the hotheads of the #FeesMustFall and Black First Land First movements. It&rsquo;s not that they don&rsquo;t have a point, it&rsquo;s that their analyses are superficial, short-sighted, ahistorical, vengeful and racist.Perhaps I&rsquo;ve not been paying attention, but I&rsquo;ve not heard anyone (of any standing) vaunting colonialism. From the left, though, (including plenty of virtue-signalling white intellectuals) it&rsquo;s become de rigueur to revile white people. That "narrative" feeds into a mix of resentment and entitlement among black people, and fear and disinvestment among whites &mdash; at a time when just the opposite is needed.&bull; Heneck is a Cape Town businessman