With Durban hosting of the 2022 Commonwealth Games in doubt, there is some disagreement over whether the city should push to keep the games or let them go. The eThekwini municipality itself says the fate of the city’s hosting the 2022 Commonwealth Games is in the hands of Sport and Recreation Minister Fikile Mbalula and the national government, and it will abide with whatever they decide. But with SA’s economy in the doldrums, the appetite to host the games in SA has faded in some quarters, and the city’s previous mayor, James Nxumalo, has been criticised for having "misplaced priorities" in pushing for the games to be held in the city in the first place. However, representatives of the hospitality sector are still keen on a Durban 2022 games, for the boost they would bring to tourism. The city was awarded the games in September 2015, in a decision that gave the games to Africa for the first time. But Mbalula said on Monday that the Durban games looked doubtful, as SA and the Commonwealth Games Federation could not reach agreement on money. Mbalula told reporters: "I don’t want to raise your expectations and say everything looks good‚ it doesn’t. We are unable to agree on the fundamentals. There is a possibility that the Commonwealth Games will be out of the window." He said a delegation from SA had gone to London to speak to the federation‚ but "we can’t find each other on the final figures". Operational costs were the main sticking point. "The only thing I know is that we‚ together with government‚ needed to submit some outstanding documents by November 30‚ which we did‚ and that the Commonwealth Games Federation is due to give a decision on March 10 or 11." The South African Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee (Sascoc) reportedly spent nearly R120m on the bid for the 2022 games. The total costs of hosting the games are estimated at R8.2bn‚ with a projected GDP benefit of about R11bn. The national government bears most of the cost of hosting such international events. On Wednesday Mthunzi Gumede, spokesperson for eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede, said: "The mayor is of the view that this matter will best be handled by Mbalula and the national Cabinet. We will abide by any decision that they come up with. We know that whatever decision they take will be in the best interest of Durban and the people of SA." Recently the ANC Youth League’s (ANCYL’s) eThekwini region, which is said to enjoy a close relationship with mayor Gumede, urged the ANC-led eThekwini municipality to abandon plans to host the games. Thinta Cibane, the youth league’s eThekwini regional secretary, said the previous eThekwini administration led by Nxumalo — who was replaced by Gumede after the August 2016 local government elections — had misplaced priorities in bidding to host the games. He said the city could not afford to pay a guarantee of R8bn, seeing that it had so many poor people in urgent need of services. "The capital injection into the economy required for these games will only benefit big monopoly capital. The youth league in eThekwini therefore rejects these games as nothing but a ploy to make big business richer at the expense of the small businesses," said Cibane. But the Federated Hospitality Association of Southern Africa (Fedhasa) and the KwaZulu-Natal Bed and Breakfast Association (Kwababa) are urging the government to pursue the games as they will bring tourists to the city. The games would bring athletes from the Commonwealth’s 70 member countries to SA. Kwababa spokesperson Heather Hunter urged the government to ensure that Durban retained the right to host the games. "I don’t think they have lost it completely yet. It would be great for Africa and for Durban to host the Commonwealth Games for the first time.... I think the government should not let an opportunity like this to go to waste. "The country will make billions of rand, there would be improvements to sport facilities and this alone would make Durban a pleasant city to live in long after the games have gone. We just hope that government leaders will take a lead and ensure that this opportunity is not taken away from us," she said. Charles Preece, a spokesperson for Fedhasa East Coast, was not available for comment but his organisation is believed to be lobbying the government to allow Durban to host the 2020 games. The UK city of Liverpool has put itself forward as a potential alternative to Durban.