1. Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini was blamed for the crisis and now may, finally, have to explain herself. This is an attempt to force her to be accountable. Dlamini didn’t appear at the standing committee on public accounts hearing on the matter in Parliament, but held a media conference instead. She missed at least two other parliamentary briefings and misled Parliament when she did appear. In papers she filed at court‚ she has given little explanation as to why the crisis occurred‚ what she knew, and why she did nothing. 2. The court, in an attempt to penalise her, has asked her to explain why she doesn’t have to pay the costs of the two party’s senior advocates. "There is little doubt that the minister and Sassa are liable in their official capacity for the costs‚" ruled Judge Johan Froneman. 3. Future recipients are protected from deductions from their grants by companies selling them loans and insurance. The order prevents Cash Paymaster Services (CPS) from giving personal contact details to their affiliate companies who try to sell air-time‚ funeral policies and loans with huge admin fees — "But this has horse has bolted‚" noted Geoff Budlender SC‚ acting for Black Sash, in court on Wednesday‚ as products have already been sold to many beneficiaries. 4. The taxpayer is protected … as the price of the contract stays the same. In December, CPS asked for an increase from R16.44 per grant payment per beneficiary to between R22 and R25. In court they asked for an inflation-based increase‚ but the court ruled the price they earn per pay-out will remain at R16.44. However‚ if CPS wants an increase‚ they have to justify it to Treasury by providing all their financial data. CPS’s income and expenses will be independently audited and the court will then decide if an increase is warranted, taking Treasury’s opinion into account. 5. Independent experts have to audit how the tender process to find a new payer is progressing, and if  Sassa can develop the capacity to pay grants without a third party. This is something Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng felt strongly that Sassa should be capable of doing. The independent experts are a safeguard because Sassa promised the court in 2015 they would have the system  ready in-house by April 1 — and broke that promise. TMG Digital