The biggest concern over the Cabinet reshuffle announced by President Jacob Zuma is whether the floodgates have now been opened for profligate state spending — whether it be by state-owned enterprises, on the controversial nuclear programme or the public sector wage bill. The key question regarding Malusi Gigaba’s move from home affairs to finance minister, to replace Pravin Gordhan, will be whether he will continue the policy of fiscal consolidation, debt reduction and belt-tightening entrenched under Gordhan. To do so would require the commitment from his fellow Cabinet colleagues — but the new appointments in key positions such as energy and public service and administration are cause for worry. Incoming minister of public service and administration Faith Muthambi will have to hold a tight rein over the public sector wage bill if the government’s fiscal consolidation programme is to stay on track, but she did not cover herself in glory with her oversight of the SABC, which descended into financial chaos under her watch. Departing minister of energy Tina Joematt-Petersson put a brake on the nuclear programme with the draft integrated resource plan, which postponed the roll-out of new nuclear plants for another 10 years. Whether her replacement — Mmamoloko Kubayi, former chairperson of Parliament’s telecommunications committee — retains the same commitment is open to doubt, seeing that she has been appointed by Zuma, who has been adamant about government’s pursuit of the nuclear programme. State-owned enterprises will remain under the control of Lynne Brown. The removal of Gordhan will be music to the ears of his arch-opponent, South African Revenue Service commissioner Tom Moyane, who has campaigning for Gordhan’s removal ever since he took office. Under Gigaba he is likely to have a free rein and not be held under the tight whip of accountability as was the case under Gordhan. SAA chairwoman Dudu Myeni - a close associate of the president who has had fierce clashes with Gordhan, who wanted her removed - will also be sitting pretty as she will now have a sympathetic ear in Treasury for her spending plans for the national airline. The Guptas will also be singing all the way to the bank, literally. The removal of Gordhan opens the way for the Gupta-aligned Vardospan to be granted a licence by Treasury for the takeover of Habib Bank. This is an urgent matter for the Guptas as it is understood that more than half of the bank accounts of Gupta-related entities have been closed in recent weeks by their last remaining banker, the Bank of Baroda. This has been denied, however, by Gupta-owned holding company Oakbay Investments.