Suspended ANC Western Cape leader Marius Fransman has launched a scathing attack on ANC secretary-general Gwede Mantashe, accusing him of serious transgressions in the Andile Lungisa matter. Mantashe has accused Lungisa of flouting the party’s constitution when he stood for and won the chairmanship of the Nelson Mandela Bay region. Lungisa is said to have defied party rules that prohibit a person in a senior position from standing for junior office. Lungisa is in the ANC’s Eastern Cape provincial executive committee. Fransman is under suspension from the party on allegations of sexual assault. Lungisa has the support of President Jacob Zuma, and the issue of his election has been referred to the ANC’s top brass. On Thursday, Mantashe would not comment on Fransman’s statement. He did say, however, that the Lungisa matter was not on the agenda for the three-day national executive committee (NEC) meeting. Fransman has been at odds with Mantashe since the ANC decided to take action against him after he was accused of sexual harassment. He even tried to take the secretary-general to court over the handling of the matter. Lungisa is adamant he will not step down before the party’s national leadership discusses the matter. Mantashe has stood fast, saying last week that it would set a bad precedent for the party if Lungisa was allowed to continue in the post. Fransman said: "I note with sadness the last two weeks how this young man Andile Lungisa’s character and his very being is being threatened by the office of the SG [secretary-general], an office that is supposed to constantly guide and must constantly direct with the sensitivity of a true leader. "A leader being the custodian of the engine of the ANC is one that doesn’t break down but builds, one that doesn’t destroy, but that creates, one that sees talent and doesn’t suppress it for political expediency." Fransman questioned how the threat of a disciplinary was a "mechanism" for "when you lose a conference" to get rid of an elected leader. The furore surrounding Lungisa is linked to the ANC’s leadership race, which will culminate in December, when Zuma’s successor is decided. Fransman called on the NEC to "take note of the serious transgressions" by Mantashe. "I call on comrade Andile not to despair, I call on Andile to recognise that important offices that are supposed to be the custodian of good practice and of good values can also be infiltrated to create havoc and create a sense of disillusionment, but I call on you, young man, not to blame the organisation but to realise that individuals being entrusted with critical responsibility can indeed fail the values and esteem of the very offices they hold," he said.