Paarl &mdash; Both the men&rsquo;s and women&rsquo;s champions at the Absa Cape Epic allowed their rivals to take the wins in the final stage at Val de Vie in Paarl, but there was no stealing the glory from men&rsquo;s champions Nino Schurter and Matthias Stirnemann and women&rsquo;s winners Esther Suss and Jennie Stenerhag.In the men&rsquo;s race the Scott-Sram MTB Racing team of Schurter and Stirnemann dominated the final stage but then swung off to allow their Scott-Sram Young Guns team of Michiel van der Heijden and Andri Frischknecht to take the grand finale victory, with the Trek-Selle San Marco team of Damiano Ferraro and Fabian Rabensteiner second.Conceding the stage win was a sweet thank-you from Schurter and Stirnemann for all the help from their back-up team, which allowed the two Scott-Sram teams to dominate the final few stages.That dominance meant the Racing Team went into the final stage with a virtually insurmountable seven-minute gap over second-placed Christoph Sauser and Jaroslav Kulhavy (Investec-Songo-Specialized). With Sauser&rsquo;s experience, however, Schurter and Stirnemann were taking nothing for granted on the 84km grand finale."Today the plan was just to get to the finish. We didn t want to do anything stupid," said Stirnemann. "It was quite emotional for me, because anything can happen and at the beginning we thought Christoph and Jaroslav would attack, so we just wanted to stay with them."As had been the case all week, though, Sauser was unable to find his legs when he needed them most."Right after the start we noticed that Christoph wasn t doing so well," said Stirnemann. "Then I started to relax and we just rode sensibly so that there were no punctures or crashes."For Schurter a bronze, silver and gold Olympic medal winner in cross-country racing the win comes in his fourth Cape Epic; his previous best had been a fifth place in 2014.The current Olympic and world champion, cool and calm as ever at the end, said the strategy was always to win the Cape Epic, but not in 2017."The plan was to come here in 2018 and win, but we are a year early!" said Schurter. "This is very special. To win the Olympics and then come to SA and win the Cape Epic, that is great. After Rio it was always my intention to come and win the Cape Epic, but this has taken us by surprise."The women s race, stage 7 from Grabouw to Val de Vie, was a tense three-way battle for the stage win, but there was never any doubt about the overall winners with Suss and Stenerhag claiming a victory by 35min despite finishing third on the final day.Robyn de Groot and Sabine Spitz (Ascendis Health), after their bad luck the previous day that saw them lose second position overall following a broken handlebar, were the most motivated and just edged the Hansgrohe Cadence OMX Pro pair of Mariska Strauss and Annie Last to claim the stage win.For Stenerhag it was a particularly emotional victory after she pulled out of the 2016 race while second and had to have heart surgery a few days later."I can t stop crying. I am so happy it is just unbelievable," said Stenerhag. "I don t know what date it is today, but I think it is four days to a year after my heart operation."Since that day my biggest goal was to try and come back to win this race. To pull it though is something completely unreal. I cannot believe that I am standing here as the winner."It is a fairy tale. I put so much into it. Everything I have done for the last three months has been just with this as a goal."It has been a tough week . But Esther and I have been in such good form that I have not found it as tough as I expected. I think that was because we have been so good this week that it did not seem so hard."We won by keeping everything smooth and consistent. We just kept calm and never thought we could win until now when we crossed the line. That helped because we never stressed about anything."