Welcome to Tweet of the Week. Every Friday I will use this column to hand out an award to one person who has tweeted something of significance. There are no strict rules, only that the tweet in question must offer an important insight, define a debate (notorious or otherwise) or mark an occasion. This week the Tweet of the Week goes to @LesDaChef for: "Isn’t tomorrow the DA disciplinary what what against Zille? Maimane and his buddies mustn’t think we’re sidetracked by Zuma, we’re watching" Profile: Lesego Semenya is an international chef and food blogger. On his website, he states, "So this is a blog about my personal journey through food. I’ll educate, I’ll entertain, I’ll review stuff and basically just debunk the complexity that is really not that complex when it comes to food." He has just more than 14k followers on Twitter. Citation: This weekend the DA’s federal executive sits to consider whether or not, on the basis of a preliminary investigation, to press formal charges against Helen Zille. So, what would you do? To answer that question, it is necessary to imagine you are Mmusi Maimane or the collective DA leadership. Here is the situation: On the table is the 2019 election and, in particular, Gauteng. All indications are that there is a chance the DA can take a significant chunk out of the ANC’s national support, and a real chance the DA can win Gauteng. But it will be close. Very, very close. Every single vote will matter. To achieve those goals, everything must go right: every potential voter must be canvassed; every DA government must perform and every message must be tailored to deliver the party’s vision and brand as effectively as possible. Every element of the party must work together to these ends. You begin your ''Road to 2019'' programme of action and the first thing you roll out is your message on "The Lost Generation", which is designed to speak to those alienated by the ANC, by promoting your alternative. And, to your great advantage is an environment entirely in your favour. The ANC, after the Sassa crisis and internal turmoil, is on the back foot and under extreme pressure on every front; divided and factionalised. You try also to drive these issues. But then you wake up one morning to find that one of your own public representatives has decided of their own volition, without consulting anyone in the party leadership, without planning for the impact or gauging the consequences, that a different agenda and message are necessary. You find Helen Zille, with more than 1-million followers on Twitter and a massive influence, has decided now is the time for the DA to rather lead a national, entirely academic, discussion about the possible benefits of the legacy of colonialism. You discover she has initiated this discussion on Twitter without telling anyone, that she has done so clumsily, that it is quickly spiralling out of control and that your carefully orchestrated plans for the party have instantaneously been rendered redundant. Instead of talking about the ANC, the conversation is now about the DA. And it isn’t good. You have no control over your message. The debate is racially charged and highly volatile. It has reversed all momentum you had and not only turned the press against the DA but pitted a former leader against the current leadership, doing damage to internal cohesion. At the same time, it serves to help the ANC coalesce, as it gives them ammunition, whatever you make of it, to paint the DA with a racist brush and unite behind that message and against a common enemy. The DA is getting butchered on television, radio, in print and online. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, it also goes against every bit of evidence that suggests such a debate is necessary to appeal to voters. Every single poll ever conducted shows issues such as jobs, crime, corruption and education are what matters. That is what people want addressed. None of them mention a debate about the potential benefits of colonialism. Every day you are now losing potential votes. Not only is the party now dramatically off message but Helen Zille, in ignoring your attempt to arrest the problem, then threatens you, effectively saying "unless you support my lead on this, you risk becoming like the ANC", and publicly blackmailing you. Finally, she demonstrates no regret or indication she aims to halt the debate. She says she is "glad my tweet brought it to the surface, because it is indeed of urgent national importance" and declares, "we can’t shut down this debate". You are the DA leader — what do you do? How do you run your organisation or deliver your message to voters? What of your party’s plans? Should they be suspended to indulge this rogue public representative, who has her own agenda? What kind of precedent should you set for the good of the DA? Remember, every single DA member is looking to you now. You have only two options: first, agree that any DA public representative should of their own accord be allowed to hold the DA’s project hostage to their whims and desires; or, second, enforce the value that the DA is a team that works together to deliver its strategy as defined by its priorities and message, and that those messages be shaped by voters’ concerns, not academic questions about the nature of history. If you agree with the former option, or a version of it, consider the precedent you set for the party. You are basically saying that no national, provincial or local leader has control over the party’s message and that anyone, based on what they think is important, can define the DA’s national agenda without consequence. How quickly, do you think, would the DA you oversee devolve into chaos? That is what Helen Zille has done. She has decided she is effectively bigger than the DA, that her concerns are more important than those of voters and that proving she is right, no matter what damage it causes, is more important than the DA’s collective strategy or prospects. She is arguing its agenda should be suspended so that she can have a national debate about a subject that is close to her heart because she, not the voters, thinks it is important. If it were anyone other than Helen Zille, this kind of behaviour would be considered a leadership challenge: a direct assault on the DA’s core messaging, the subversion of the DA leadership’s programme of action and a refusal to cease and desist. This is the nature of the dilemma Maimane and the DA’s federal executive face, ahead of their meeting this weekend, to decide whether to charge Helen Zille or not. How do you run what is effectively a communications machine when your message has been sabotaged and you can’t communicate on your own terms? If you choose the latter option, you need to understand that the DA leader cannot wave a magic wand and bring an end to this all. You have to follow a process and, even then, it can be overturned in court, as the DA found out when it tried to fire Peter Marais. So, what is the legal case against Zille you can pursue? The DA’s constitution states that the party has the right to terminate the membership of any public representative "on the grounds of incapacity owing to poor performance". With regard to poor performance, two categories it cites are pertinent. It says a public representative will be guilty of misconduct if that person: • Deliberately acts in a way which impacts negatively on the image or performance of the party; and • Brings the good name of the party into disrepute or harms the interests of the party. On both those counts Helen Zille would seem to have violated the DA constitution. That she acted deliberately is beyond doubt. Her entire defence rests on the claim that her twelve tweets were carefully constructed to deliver a particular message. She says the only problem is that their meaning was "distorted". In turn, her tweets undoubtedly had a negative impact on the image of the party. One need only print out the now monumental number of negative stories into a physical pile as evidence on this front. You could literally touch and see the damage done. Likewise, they have had a categorically negative impact on the DA’s performance. Its ability to carry out its agenda or deliver its message has been completely arrested in the light of Zille’s tweets. Its national programme of action has been brought to a complete halt as all public attention has been turned to her tweets. Regarding the second clause, the good name of the party has been damaged for the exact same reasons, and more besides. The fact that Zille did not consult means her tweets have created a standoff between her and the national leader. Without even considering their content, they have introduced a divide into the party. And the DA’s good name, which it intricately links to internal cohesion and the lack of division, has been compromised. Likewise, its interests — delivering a carefully designed message to voters and potential voters — have been sabotaged. There is an important point to make about Zille’s debate here. The purpose of political communication is to win voters over to a cause. But there has been no outpouring of potential DA voters who have gone, "I never used to vote DA, but based on Helen Zille’s views on the legacy of colonialism, I am now going to vote DA." Those people who support Zille supported her before she spoke. In truth, quite the opposite has happened, there has been a flood of anger and resentment towards the DA. Her debate served no DA purpose. There is another relevant clause in the DA’s constitution, with regard to misconduct. It says a person is guilty of misconduct if that person: • Fails to carry out his or her duties and/or responsibilities according to standards set by the federal council of the party or of the relevant provincial or regional council, or to standards required by any statutory rules of conduct required by the public office he or she holds. The Code of Conduct for DA public representatives, adopted by the federal council, states: • Public representatives are expected at all times to defend and promote the interests of the party, and to propagate the party’s policy and standpoints when appropriate. Any action or statement by a public representative which brings the good name of the party into disrepute will be viewed in a very serious light. Zille cannot argue that her position on the legacy of colonialism is a party standpoint or policy. Her position has been contested by no less than the DA leader and the chair of the DA federal executive. It has split the party. Thus she has not acted in a way that promotes the party’s interests because, by definition, her view is divisive and expressed without consultation. At the very least, the party held no position on it, prior to her tweets, and she has publicly forced a position on the DA. It would seem that at face value Helen Zille has a very serious case to answer and the DA would be well within its rights to act against her. So the question is, if you were the DA leadership, would you ignore all of this because Zille argues she was right? There will be those who argue, because they agree with her position, she should be left alone. In turn, that this is a freedom of speech issue and the many attacks on her are unfair and unjust. Their position is understandable, even if you disagree with it. They do not want to concede ground to their enemies in a debate. And if Zille is sanctioned they will see this as a defeat. But they confuse academic discussion with politics. A party is not a university. It must win votes. The DA simply cannot afford an ongoing discussion of colonialism, which is what Zille is threatening, nor a rouge premier with her own agenda acting ultra vires. No one, no matter how much they admire or support Zille can argue that such a debate is in the DA’s best interests or, actually, important. Voters’ concerns are not about how history is defined. They want good governance, a job and an education. Many people believe things strongly. That is their right. But when you work for a political party (and you have 1-million followers) you are there to represent the party, not yourself. If you elevate your own, massively racially fraught and uncontrollable agenda above that of the party, you damage its ability to function strategically and effectively. In short, you negatively impact on its ability to win votes and talk to voters about issues that matter most to them. So here, finally, is the ultimate choice you must make: risk 2019 and allow Helen Zille to define the DA’s agenda on her terms by talking about the legacy of colonialism, or take the necessary action to revert to the DA’s core message and brand, focused on demonstrating a viable and attractive alternative to the ANC, that matters to potential voters? By refusing to stop advocating her views and, indeed, demanding that the debate not be shut down, Helen Zille is effectively holding a gun to your head as DA leader and the party collectively. What do you do?