The president and CEO of Ford Motor Company of Southern Africa, Jeff Nemeth, on Tuesday stood up for the beleaguered car brand and told Parliament that there was no link between the fires plaguing the company&rsquo;s Kuga models and the death of motorist Reshall Jimmy.Ford has found itself in the throes of a public relations and consumer safety storm after taking a whole year to act on a crisis characterised by Kuga engines catching fire. The company only initiated a safety recall in January, after about 50 Kugas had caught fire.Nemeth told Parliament&rsquo;s portfolio committee on trade and industry that while the company acknowledged it could have handled the matter better, none of the incidents where Kuga engines had caught fire were found to have led to injury or death."We also hoped to address the incorrect connection made between the recall and the death of Mr Reshall Jimmy. These are unrelated. There has not been a single injury or fatality as a result of the fires in Kugas," Nemeth said. "We continue to co-operate with the police to ensure that investigations of this matter are concluded."Nemeth told the committee that while the Ford Kuga debacle was a major issue for Ford, the phenomenon of car engines catching fire was not unusual among other car brands."Vehicle fires are rare but they do happen. There were 2,128 vehicle fires in SA last year. These will happen in old cars and new cars, expensive cars and inexpensive cars. They happen to all makes and models," he said.Nemeth also said the company took a long time to effect a recall because it wanted to avoid misdiagnosing the problem and recalling the wrong makes of vehicles. Ford&rsquo;s recall process includes data collection, evaluation, risk assessment and solution development.&nbsp;Nemeth added: "My family drives a 1.6l Kuga and as a parent, I feel nothing but absolute confidence in the vehicle&rsquo;s safety. When Ford encounters a situation when safety is a concern we must consider all possible steps, including a recall. These steps involve a range of factors."Nemeth said Ford had checked 3,200 of the 4,556 Ford Kugas recalled to date. He said 2,700 were returned to their owners after undergoing a service.A total of 1,300 Kugas remained in the market while 359 customers had opted to trade in their Kuga for another Ford make vehicle.