In the indoor nets deep in the bowels of the Basin Reserve in Wellington on Tuesday‚ television crews set up their microphones and cameras and awaited the day’s South African media conference victim‚ Temba Bavuma. The TV types had aimed their devices at a spot that would record footage of someone about 1.8m tall. Bavuma stands 19cm shorter than that. Happily‚ a suitably diminutive reporter was on hand to serve as Bavuma’s body double and the gizmos were re-angled. Presently‚ Bavuma arrived and took refuge from a wind that roared across the grandest and most exposed of New Zealand’s grounds at 50km/h. The gale is due to subside by the time the second Test starts on Thursday‚ but Bavuma was not taking that as read. "Being a guy that doesn’t weigh that much‚ I might have to play with bricks in my pockets‚" he said to chuckles all round. But he was not being entirely unserious. "The conditions are starkly different to what I’m used to back home. "It’s pretty much everything I’ve been told — wickets are a bit slower‚ there’s not as much steep bounce‚ the wind is much more of a factor. I’m just adjusting my game...." Bavuma adjusted well enough in the first Test in Dunedin to score 64 in SA’s first innings‚ his first half-century in eight innings. Had he changed much about his approach from his previous seven trips to the crease‚ when his best effort was 21? "Nothing specifically‚" Bavuma said. "Mentally‚ it’s just about being up for the fight‚ understanding that there will be pressure situations and trying to find a way to get through those situations." Seven weeks ago‚ after Bavuma scored 21 runs in five innings against Sri Lanka‚ he spoke of the challenges he faced. "I’ve spoken to people who are close to me and they keep saying I’m not out of form‚ that I’m playing well‚" Bavuma said then. "My feeling is that you can’t be playing well and not scoring runs. "I had time to reflect on the Sri Lankan series‚ and I don’t think there’s anything technical that stands out. It’s probably more from a mental point of view — probably just trying to simplify things." Although by then AB de Villiers had withdrawn himself for selection from SA’s Test series in New Zealand and England in July‚ Bavuma felt the edge of the axe at his neck. "We all anticipated that AB was going to come back sometime‚" he said. "He’s a world-class player‚ and if I was told to not play because of him‚ there’s nothing I can counter that with." Bavuma will be given another opportunity to build his argument to keep his place at the Basin Reserve. Fast bowler Tim Southee — who was left out in Dunedin to make room for a second spinner — is likely to be back in the mix and on Wednesday the Kiwis will issue an update on Trent Boult‚ who sustained an upper-leg injury in the first Test. The home side will hope he is fit‚ because the faster‚ bouncier Basin Reserve pitch will not be much like the slow turner that put itself in the path of progress at University Oval. Whatever the changes in personnel and the conditions‚ Bavuma will still be 1.61m tall. He was not asked about that on Tuesday — New Zealanders‚ even their television reporters‚ have good manners. But if he had been‚ he would not have blinked. "I’m quite used to it‚" Bavuma said seven weeks ago. "Every time I get asked about that I always try and think of a different answer." Now there is an attitude to take into the middle. Perhaps he has. TMG Digital