I look at the world through the lens of water. And what a useful focus it provides. Consider SA&rsquo;s recent concerns about radical economic transformation. We certainly need it, but the slogan means different things to different people. We can probably agree that too few South Africans have jobs or other ways to earn a decent livelihood. Too much wealth is concentrated in too few hands. And too much power, in the hands of a few, is being used to accumulate more wealth instead of taking action to benefit the often marginalised majority.Water offers us some insights into what should be done differently to achieve real radical economic transformation.Start with the economy. No productive activities can happen without water. The big economy is important. We need to keep the farms, factories and mines going because they produce what is needed for a reasonable quality of life or the foreign exchange to buy what we cannot make or grow ourselves.Water for our farmers is important too. If we were rich enough, we could just buy more food from other countries, as we already import wheat from the US and chickens from Brazil.But farming provides jobs and the raw materials for industry and saves on foreign exchange that can be used to buy other things we can&rsquo;t make here. So it must get its share of water, which must then be used wisely.Small local economies are also important. Haircare, a valuable service industry in our communities, cannot operate without water. Car washes provide an income for youngsters who would otherwise be hanging out on street corners. At the very least, working people need a reliable supply of good-quality water so they can go about their jobs and their lives.So the vital contribution of the water and sanitation minister to real economic transformation is to ensure the economy has the water it needs.While sub-Saharan Africa is often described as "water scarce", the continent uses less than 5% of the water available in its rivers, lakes and underground. It suffers from economic not physical scarcity. Simply put, countries and communities just don&rsquo;t have enough money to get water to their people. So far, SA has been the fortunate exception.The government and the minister should thus be seized with a single vision: getting water to the people and organisations that need it, regularly and reliably. Without that, there will be no economy to share or transform.Unfortunately, this has not been the focus of our minister, Nomvula Mokonyane. Instead, as has been well documented, she has been delaying the projects we need. She admits she is doing this to ensure that, in the name of&nbsp;her version of radical transformation, a few small groups of individuals can benefit from the work.One consequence is that the Lesotho Highlands Water Project, which should keep Gauteng and surrounding areas water secure, is now more than five years late. The South African Weather Services warn that we may already be entering a new El Nino drought. If that happens, Gauteng will suffer far more acute restrictions than have been experienced recently because there will be more people and more economic activity to serve.This delay is already having an effect. Businesses can see their risks growing. They ask advisers like me for the numbers: how much water will be available in Gauteng in 2020 or 2022 if we have another drought? What restrictions might they face?Recently, when I put the numbers on the table, the decision was obvious. A large multinational decided they had to take their billions of rand of investment and thousands of new jobs elsewhere.So delaying a project to give a handful of (already rich) people even more money has deprived thousands of poor people of the chance of a job.The loss of investment will also mean less spending and income in Gauteng and fewer livelihood opportunities for the people who build and run our society, from bricklayers to hairdressers. That&rsquo;s not real radical economic transformation.Unfortunately, this is not the only case. The city of Mangaung and its people also need more water to meet the needs of a slowly growing population and economy. A study done to determine how best to do that presented two options.The first would upgrade existing infrastructure and operate it more carefully. That would secure the city&rsquo;s supplies until 2030, even if the economy and population grew faster than expected.The second option was to build a big pipeline from the Gariep Dam more than 200km away and pump the water from there. That would cost three times as much as the upgrading option. The need for pumping would further increase the cost of water, reducing the city&rsquo;s competitiveness and growth. Mangaung&rsquo;s people would be worse off as a result.But a few individuals in the municipality and some of the same handful of private businesses will benefit &mdash; so that&rsquo;s the option the minister wants to implement.This will also take money from projects that could serve other communities. So the true cost of making a small number of people even richer will be to leave many poor people without reliable services. Again, that is neither real transformation nor radical. Indeed, it is merely about keeping the country&rsquo;s wealth in the hands of a few.The final example is the proposed Umzimvubu Dam in the Eastern Cape. The Umzimvubu is one of SA&rsquo;s major rivers. Since apartheid, it has been seen as a development opportunity for the impoverished Eastern Cape communities that live in its catchment. The challenge has been to find a way to use the water to the benefit of those communities.A dam was designed that would provide water for irrigation to allow about 3,000 farmers to get into intensive smallholder agriculture, in line with the New Growth Path and National Development Plan.It would also generate hydroelectricity to help balance the unpredictable power from the Eastern Cape&rsquo;s wind and solar power. And it would support a large regional water-supply project for local communities, replacing smaller supply systems that local municipalities have often failed to operate reliably.But instead of doing the hard work of co-ordinating and encouraging the electricity and agricultural sector, whose contribution would help to make the dam economically viable, the minister pressed ahead with just the water-supply project.She has demanded that the Treasury provide the funds and complained loudly when they questioned the project&rsquo;s viability. It appears her priority is to get her hands on the construction funds rather than work to unlock the transformative opportunities the Eastern Cape so sorely needs.Ironically, the multinational that abandoned Gauteng is looking elsewhere in SA. It is considering investing in a location in which it can get the water it needs without relying on local or national government.One aim of real radical economic transformation would be to see economic opportunities shared more equally across the country. So, unintentionally, the minister may yet help real transformation.The message, though, is clear. The failure of government leaders to act in the public interest is costing the country investment opportunities and jobs.And this failure is one reason for our failure as a country to achieve the real radical transformation so many people desire.&bull; Muller is a visiting professor at the Wits School of Governance, a professional engineer and former commissioner of the National Planning Commission and director-general of water affairs