Highlighting its tough management reputation, Anheuser-Busch InBev (AB InBev) has canned bonuses for most of its executive board because of the disappointing 2016 financial results. It will be the first time since 2008 that CEO Carlos Brito will miss out on a bonus.The move is expected to affect swathes of executives in the group which, after last year&rsquo;s $103bn acquisition of SABMiller, now controls just more than 25% of the global beer market. South African executives will not be affected as the old SABMiller scheme will apply to them for the year.A final dividend of &euro;2 a share brings the full payout to &euro;3.60.The notable aspect of the results was the hefty 5% drop in beer volumes in the three months (to end-December), which included the former South African Breweries&rsquo; figures. Industry sources say it is the steepest decline in SA in more than 15 years. It is in line with the full-year drop in cider volumes reported by Distell.The decline was attributed to "macroeconomic weakness and a sizeable price increase" as well as currency and commodity headwinds.AB InBev&rsquo;s disappointing performance saw the share price drop 3% on Thursday to close at more than &euro;100 in Belgium. The share price was also down almost 3% on the JSE, where it ended the day at R1,391.61, its worst since listing in January 2016 at just less than R2,000. The decline in the JSE price reflects the strength of the rand and disappointment with the continued poor performance. The December quarter is the seventh successive quarter that AB InBev has missed analysts&rsquo; forecasts.The results disappointed analysts on so many fronts that one at Exane BNP Paribas suggested there might well be an element of "kitchen-sinking".Adjusted fourth-quarter earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation fell to $5.25bn. Analysts were looking for $5.64bn.The biggest source of concern was AB InBev&rsquo;s key market, Brazil, where volumes were under pressure and the company lost market share. Heineken&rsquo;s recent big acquisitions in Brazil are likely to ensure AB InBev remains under pressure in that market.In the US, full-year revenue was flat, but the business delivered "a solid financial performance" on the back of tight management and favourable brand mix.Despite the disappointing performance, Brito sounded upbeat during a presentation on Thursday. He told analysts that Brazil appeared to be through the worst and management expected to secure more synergies from the SABMiller tie-up than initially targeted.Brito said the acquisition was producing "reverse synergies" as AB InBev integrated lessons from SABMiller.But the deal has left AB InBev with a big debt that is expected to restrain dividend payments. Net finance costs shot up to $5.2bn for the full year, from $1.2bn in financial 2015.