In 2016, the National Arts Festival in Grahamstown was marred by problems that were not of the organisers’ making. Makana Municipality’s erratic supply of water and electricity, pitted roads and its inability to collect refuse hampered the event. Festival CEO Tony Lankester wrote afterwards: "The festival is not universally loved in Grahamstown." The Eastern Cape government understands and appreciates the festival’s importance, providing special programming such as the Dakawa township jazz festival and the Eastern Cape traditional instruments showcase, which have become popular attractions. The festival receives funding via the Department of Arts and Culture’s Mzansi Golden Economy. The strategy, implemented in 2011, offers a series of economic interventions broadly aimed at catalysing growth in the arts sector. It supports 25 regional and national festivals a year and about 100 to 150 on an ad hoc basis. Regional festivals such as Innibos in Nelspruit and Vryfees in Bloemfontein take place soon after the National Arts Festival, creating touring opportunities for artists. A report conducted by the South African Cultural Observatory on behalf of the Department of Arts and Culture in 2016 measured the economic effect of the festival on Grahamstown at R94.4m and R377.1m on the Eastern Cape — an increase of 5% since 2015. Last year, festival attendance was down 5% and 51% of attendees came from the Eastern Cape. The host sponsor of the National Arts Festival for the 16th consecutive year is the provincial government. "The Eastern Cape is the proud home of this prestigious festival, which is proving itself to be an artistic footprint," says the province’s MEC for sport, recreation, arts and culture, Pemmy Majodina. "We look forward to welcoming international and national artists and audiences descending on Rhini [the isiXhosa name for the town] for yet another 11 days of amazing this year." The festival and Rhodes University have a symbiotic relationship. Rhodes provides logistics, accommodation and venues and receives opportunities to market itself and make some income. The university’s International Library of African Music and the collection of Hugh Tracey stage outreach projects during the festival. The Thinkfest, now a permanent event on the calendar, was started by journalism professor Anthea Garman. Lankester became involved in the festival in 1991 as a student at Rhodes and has been involved since. The festival is a Section 21 company, with an independent board of directors and he has been CEO for a decade. "In order to survive in today’s market place as an arts business, we needed to look beyond an 11-day festival in Grahamstown once a year," he says. The National Arts Festival established the Cape Town Fringe and Cape Town Buskers festivals and ticketing business Tickethub. It is currently touring with the production of Gruffalo. "It puts our brand in more spaces and establishes us more strongly as a multifaceted arts brand," says Lankester. "Our core business is that we organise festivals and big events, but the more we can play it out in different environments, the better it is for the sustainability of the brand." Standard Bank’s support for the National Arts Festival is SA’s longest-running arts sponsorship, now in its 34th year. It has developed many properties within the festival such as the Standard Bank Jazz Festival, the National Youth Jazz Festival, the Children’s Arts Festival and the Young Artist Awards. The bank also sponsors the Cape Town Fringe Festival. Previous festival director Ismail Mahomed left a legacy of augmenting available resources with partnerships to increase support for the creation of new work. "As a strong advocate for freedom of expression and freedom of creativity, I openly challenged gatekeeping and assured artists that the National Arts Festival — despite its legacy rooted in the 1820 Settlers — can be relevant in a new country, in a time and with a new value system," says Mahomed. The festival hosts about 3,000 items. The 50 shows on the main programme are sponsored and curated and 350 shows on the fringe festival are self-funded. This is Ashraf Johaardien’s first year as the festival’s executive producer. Previously, the director at the Arts and Culture Trust, his primary role is to work with the artistic committee, headed by Brett Bailey. The theme for the 2017 festival is "art in disruption". "The degree to which being a destination festival defines the character of Grahamstown can’t be underscored enough," says Johaardien. "Of the available artistic budget, 35% goes towards travel, accommodation and per diems for artists. I think that is easily creeping over the 40% mark and moving towards the 50% mark." The fringe festival requires the most support. Playwright Mike van Graan estimated in 2014 that performers here required an 85% capacity audience to cover their costs. The Fringe is a defining feature of the festival. "It gives you a sense of where the country is at; its temperament and mood," says Johaardien. He first came to the Fringe in 1993 with an independent student production from the University of Cape Town. "We drove up in a car, slept on the floor and figured out how to make it." Johaardien wants to engage artists in a conversation about making the festival a financial success. "Certain artists know they can earn their next six months’ salary because they know what they are going to do and they have a keen understanding of audiences and the ecosystem of the festival."