There is never a shortage of thrills and spills in the WRC (World Rally Championship) and it was definitely the case in the second leg of the 2017 season which took place in Mexico this past weekend. It was a great race for Kris Meeke (Citroen Abu Dhabi) who romped to the lead on the first day and finished the weekend on the top step of the podium. He experienced a dramatic issue on the last day though when he slid off just two corners from the end and found himself having to navigate his way around a car park before rejoining the stage. Although Meeke lost time he still managed to take the win. He was followed in second spot by Sebastien Ogier (M-Sport Ford Fiesta RS) and Thierry Neuville (Hyundai i20). On the local front, Total SA has announced its sponsorship of the South African Cross Country Motor Racing Series (SACCS). This follows on the heels of the company’s sponsorship of the Toyota Gazoo Racing team, announced late in 2016. The sponsorship is a one-year deal where Total SA will provide its fuel for all the racing events on the calendar throughout the year for all cross country vehicles, motorbikes and quad bikes. The series will be known as the South African Cross Country Series Powered by Total and will comprise six events with five held in SA and one in Botswana. Ambitious plans "Total has an ambitious growth plan for the coming years and part of this plan is to improve the visibility of our products and services, notably Total Excellium fuel and our world class lubricants, Total Quartz. The Cross Country Series will show our fuel offering with Total Excellium and the sponsorship of the Toyota Gazoo Racing team of Giniel de Villiers and Leeroy Poulter focuses on our Total Quarts lubricants products," says Pierre-Yves Sachet, CEO of Total SA. "This sponsorship allows us not only to test our products under the harshest of conditions, but also to reach our target market with a medium that is visually exciting and highly entertaining. The professional way that this series is presented and the attractiveness for international teams to participate bring additional benefits for us and we look forward to an exciting motorsport calendar." Puma Lubricants has come on board as co-sponsor for the Ford Performance Puma Lubricants team, run by Neil Woolridge Motorsport, which will compete in the off-road series. Says Richard Beckers business to business and lubricants manager for Africa, Puma Energy: "We are excited to be sponsoring one of the top teams in one of the most competitive cross country championships in the world. This is the first time we are sponsoring a motor racing team in SA and we look forward to assisting Neil Woolridge Motorsport to achieve its goals in 2017. As a business expanding across Africa this ties in with our aim to deliver greater benefits for drivers as well as increased productivity for key industries and the B2B market in general." The Extreme Festival’s first race of the season will take place at Zwartkops Raceway on March 21, which promises to be yet another great start to an eventful year of close racing.