Kaizer Chiefs coach Steve Komphela and his Mamelodi Sundowns counterpart Pitso Mosimane sparred with each other over the unwanted underdog tag at their prematch media conference on Thursday ahead of Saturday s Premiership match-up.On Wednesday, Mosimane winning the PSL s coach of the month award for February had declared Chiefs favourites for the crucial fixture at FNB Stadium. He was at it again sitting alongside his Chiefs counterpart Komphela at a media conference in Houghton though Mosimane did have a little more than the normal glint in his eye while he said: "We are the underdogs at this point in time."Because Kaizer Chiefs have been doing better than us in the league. If you check the last seven or eight games they have not lost. There was a stage where they won five in a row."And we envy them and wish we could win five in a row too. And they have drawn three recently but we have drawn two and lost one. So we are not in a very good space at the moment."I understand that Chiefs medical room is empty and we have a lot of injuries."And, obviously, there are the number of games that we have to come back from in Caf [Champions League] and the games we have had to catch up and they have fresh legs."So, this is not the right time for us to play them."Komphela was having none of it. "I beg to differ. Underdogs in what sense?" the Chiefs coach asked in disbelief though matching Mosimane s wry grin."Underdogs are not defined on a sprint. Underdog is such a dangerous tag because the universe favours the underdogs."So, perhaps Mr Mosimane is seeking some favour from some divine power. But that they are underdogs we will never abide by that. We give them the respect that they deserve. Their achievements are clear. We just have to give our best with the utmost humility."Earlier in the week, Mosimane with tongue firmly wedged in his cheek said he fancied Cape Town City to win the Premiership this season."And I think Cape Town City look good to win the league. I fancy them to win the league because they are well rested."It s like Chelsea they don t have to play Champions League and they are only waiting for&nbsp;the league. They are fresh. So, Kaizer Chiefs are fresh. They are only playing in the Nedbank Cup."We are everywhere. Now in April we are playing one game every three days we are &nbsp;playing nine games. In May, we play nine games including in Africa. So, which team is going to struggle Sundowns."And Wits depending how seriously they take the Confederation Cup."I know SuperSport United will give it a go in the Confed Cup. So, they and us are disadvantaged," Mosimane said.Fourth-placed Sundowns have 34 points from 17 games and can deal a significant blow to Chiefs PSL title chances. Amakhosi have 36 points from 21 games.TMG Digital