The ANC national executive committee (NEC) meeting at the weekend affirmed that a special meeting to deal with the issue of land expropriation would be held, secretary-general Gwede Mantashe has said. He did not say when this special meeting would take place, but media reports on Monday said it would probably to be held before the policy conference. "The masses of our people demand faster action on land restitution and redistribution. "To give practical expression to this historic mission of the ANC, the ANC must accelerate land redistribution within the existing legislative framework," Mantashe said. He said the ANC needed to identify areas that were an impediment to effective and speedy land redistribution. "Achieving this will require that … we endeavour to unite former liberation movements and the dispossessed black majority to whom the resolution of the land question is central to their existence." The liberation was incomplete without the return of the land to the people. He accused the EFF of stealing the governing party’s policy on land redistribution. "It’s not their position, it’s ANC policy. [It is] ANC policy stolen by the EFF," he told journalists in Johannesburg. Mantashe was briefing the media following the three-day NEC meeting in Irene, Pretoria. The EFF has called for the Constitution to be changed to allow for land expropriation without compensation. The ANC’s position in its policy discussion document is far removed from this and proposes that the government do away with paying a premium price when buying land for reform and that instead it gives just and equitable compensation for land. EFF spokesman Mbuyiseni Ndlozi accused the ANC of being in denial. "They now have a double guilt — it’s guilty of plagiarism and they are guilty of denialism," he told Business Day. "The ANC does not have a policy of land expropriation without compensation, it has rejected it, even in its conferences in Mangaung…. They have been rejecting this policy for some time now." Ndlozi said the ANC went on record in Parliament as saying that expropriation without compensation was not the party’s policy when it rejected the EFF’s offer of its 6% of the national vote in order to amend the Constitution. The offer was made by EFF leader Julius Malema in February, but the ANC in Parliament shot this down, saying it would be unconstitutional. President Jacob Zuma has himself said he believed the Constitution needed to be changed to allow for the restitution of land without compensation. Speaking to the House of Traditional Leaders earlier in March, he said all "black parties" in Parliament needed to work together to do this. However, on Human Rights Day the president toned down his comments, saying the government would use "available instruments" to expedite the redistribution of land. ANC members have differed on whether or not the party should have rejected the offer.