The furious reaction to Western Cape Premier Helen Zille&rsquo;s comments about the value of the colonial contribution to SA&rsquo;s judiciary and transport, health and reticulation infrastructure indicates where many black South Africans imagine SA is located today in its "decolonisation", 23 years after the introduction of democracy.By contrast with India and Singapore, which largely appear to have moved beyond a discourse centred on the legacy of colonialism and are looking for hybrid forms of institution-building, economic development and state-making, SA often seems mired in its efforts to formulate credible alternatives and strategies to escape the grip of colonialism.The country has arrived at this juncture partly because of the apparent failure of liberals and the left within the ANC to deliver a widely accepted version of development that enables the black poor and working classes to access a greater share of the economic wealth and the possibility of a better life in their lifetimes.Thabo Mbeki experimented with a model for national economic development that depended on building a welfare state to support those who were unable to participate in the economy, while at the same time promoting a globalised, neoliberal economic order for those who could. By the mid-2000s, a large number of black households were on welfare, while rich, well-educated whites and their black economic partners were accumulating capital. The model of development was exposed as narrow, leading to rising inequality and unemployment.The discontent at this outcome helped to bring Jacob Zuma to power. His anti-intellectual Africanist populism, which emphasised rural development, won much support in Polokwane. In some ways, the economic trajectory pursued by Zuma may be seen as following an Africanist development path, similar to that outlined by the Pan Africanist Congress (PAC) after it split from the ANC in 1958. The Africanists under Robert Sobukwe basically rejected communism and the political left&rsquo;s class analysis as little more than a strategy for the continuation of white domination under Russia. At the same time, they openly supported new forms of African accumulation through nationalisation and the seizure of white assets.The other main plank of the PAC&rsquo;s strategy was to reclaim the land by placing it under indigenous, African forms of leadership and authority. For the PAC, the struggle against apartheid would be led from the countryside, not the mines or the factories. Rural Africans would rise, go to the cities and eventually overcome white power. This theory of revolution was articulated in the PAC&rsquo;s, millenarian "free in sixty-three" movement, which the party&rsquo;s leader, PK Leballo, promoted while Sobukwe was in jail and tried to implement from his stronghold in Lesotho.The ANC rejected the PAC&rsquo;s land-based vision and strategy, arguing that freedom from modernity would not deliver the best results for the majority. It favoured an urban development model in which the majority gained control of the mines, industries and other levers of economic development. It imagined a racially inclusive democracy as articulated in the Freedom Charter (which the Africanists rejected) and based on a modern constitution and bill of rights that would promote the redistribution of wealth and opportunity.In this regard, Zuma&rsquo;s initial emphasis on rural development after gaining power signalled a shift to PAC policy. Accordingly, he received a lot of support from rural ANC youth, like Julius Malema, who pushed the PAC line harder than he did. In the years that followed, Zuma implemented what might be described as a weak version of the Pan Africanist manifesto of the 1950s, which sought to promote a rurally based version of racial nationalism.First, Zuma affirmed his connection with the rural through the construction and occupation of Nkandla as a kind of citadel of African nationalism. Second, he has sought to reconstruct traditional leadership through the entrenchment of customary and chiefly power in the teeth of much political resistance. Third, Zuma has strongly supported the continuation of a policy of restitution of land as the primary mechanism for rural development. While the policy offers compensation for dispossession, its virtues may be regarded as largely limited to those of the moral high ground since it does little proactively to support development.In 2016, following mounting internal criticism of the slow pace of land reform, Zuma and others among the ANC&rsquo;s leadership identified the rapid broadening of access to rural land as a pillar of ANC policy for 2017. However, the terms of the policy are limited. It seeks primarily to meet unmet "land needs" rather than to galvanise land as a major tool for national economic development. In this regard, the challenge for Zuma and his critics in the EFF is not so much that he is adopting the wrong policy focus, but that he is ignoring the urban poor and moving too slowly along the path of the Africanisation of colonial assets.Notwithstanding the shortcomings of Zuma&rsquo;s rural development policies, the results of 2016&rsquo;s elections suggest he gained some benefit from his decolonisation strategy, which arguably has sown the seeds of change. The rural constituency voted overwhelming for the ANC.However, Zuma&rsquo;s PAC-inspired rural empowerment policies were of little concern to most of the population in the cities, where the DA made significant gains alongside the EFF. The thousands of protests that occur every year in SA bear testimony to the government&rsquo;s failure to forge an enduring social contract that answers the needs of the urban majority. In the cities, the call is often for development and inclusion, not autonomy and separation.SA faces apparently insurmountable odds in its search for forms of progressive nationalism and globalism as the global North finds itself mired in fear, chauvinism and racism. However, neither Zille&rsquo;s legalistic liberalism, with its admiration for colonial achievement, nor Zuma&rsquo;s self-serving rural nationalism offer such progress. The millenarian insurrectionism of Malema&rsquo;s EFF is born of the politics of desperation rather than genuine development.For those who believe SA has yet to engage seriously with the process of decolonisation, it is important to learn from the decolonisation efforts championed by Mbeki and Zuma, both of which have fallen short. In this regard, the task of forging a way forward will not be found, as Zille fondly imagines, in referencing the failed colonial model, but rather in alternative readings and engagements with the hybrid ideological, institutional and political DNA of the century-old ANC and other liberation and postcolonial political movements.&bull; Prof Bank is affiliated to the University of Fort Hare. He is writing a book on the history of PAC politics in the Eastern Cape and their relevance for SA today