The Department of Home Affairs will push ahead with plans to establish border processing centres for refugees, as part of sweeping legislative changes to SA’s immigration regime, which will also redefine processes leading to citizenship. International migration was growing in importance as a political issue, with SA requiring systematic reform to reflect the "profound impact" of the issue on the government and society, Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba said on Friday. SA must begin strategically managing migration rather than focusing on compliance, Gigaba said, "rather than intervening in a short-term and populist manner that many politicians would be wont to do". Gibaba was speaking during a conference on international migration, including discussions of a new white paper on international migration. The draft paper expected to be given to the Cabinet by the end of March was expected to lead to amendments of at least five acts. These amendments, including the Immigration Act and Marriage Act, come as the department pushes to establish new structures including a border management authority that could assume the role of managing all aspects of the cross-border movement of people and goods. The Department of Home Affairs expects the new white paper to lead to legislative changes by 2018, replacing the current 1999 policy document now seen as "outdated". The department sees the policy framework as a shift towards a more "Afro-centric" immigration regime, leveraging the development potential of migration, particularly at a regional level. Among the proposals within the draft white paper include increased rules for economic migrants, and the removal of an automatic progression from residency to citizenship. The green paper on international migration published in June 2016 included sweeping changes to SA’s approach to economic migrants, refugees and naturalisation. These included "processing camps" that would house refugees pending adjudication of their cases. It would remove the automatic right to work or study pending the finalisation of an application, which would take place within 120 days. This proposal remains, with a naturalisation strategy to be developed. The draft white paper also proposed the mandatory registration of South African expatriates, as well as the introduction of a points-based system to determine eligibility criteria for long-term visas, with an end to the process of automatic citizenship for long-term residents. This would be replaced by a proposed citizenship advisory panel to consider applications. About 16-million foreign nationals enter and exit SA every year, with 1,082,669 asylum seekers being registered between 2006 and 2015. SA has also deported 369,000 people from 2012 to 2017, with the Department of Home Affairs estimating that 95% of asylum applications were from economic migrants as opposed to political refugees. The department is expected to argue before the Cabinet and Parliament that the cost of a lack of investment in managing migration exceeds that of building capacity, but has not quantified the cost. "…It is not possible to prepare a complete fiscal and financial assessment of the white paper’s implications, which would be more properly assessed during the legislative process," an abridged version of the draft white paper reads.