Foreign investors are a lot more upbeat about SA’s politics and equity market than they were a year ago, and this was reflected in record attendance at the 18th annual Merrill Lynch investor conference last week. The foreign investors at the conference were looking to potential positive changes after the ANC’s elective conference and beyond, and fears of SA losing its investment grade in 2017 had been pushed out, Merrill Lynch SA investment strategist John Morris said on Thursday. The investment banking group’s latest survey of domestic fund managers found that only 18% of local fund managers expect SA to lose its investment grade rating this year, down from 70%-80% in 2016, at the time of the threats to Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan. Morris said if SA did get downgraded, it would only be in 2018. Local fund managers were also "macro-optimists" when it came to inflation and interest rates, with 75% expecting two interest-rate cuts within the next 12 months, with the first (of 25 basis points) coming in the third quarter of 2017. Many foreign fund managers also saw interest rates coming down and were looking to stocks such as retail geared to a "recovering consumer", Morris said. However, the South African business representatives at the conference did not share the fund managers’ view on interest rates, but expected rates to remain flat. The Merrill Lynch investor conference, held at Sun City, brings together some of the world’s largest fund managers with South African-listed companies for one-on-one meetings and informal interaction. Although the JSE-sponsored annual investor conference in New York brings together some of the same players, the Merrill Lynch conference is the largest held in SA. This year it hosted a record 69 companies, including 30 of the top 40 JSE-listed entities, and attracted 184 investors from 71 institutions, of which 46 were offshore and 25 local. There were a record 587 one-on-one meetings between fund management houses and companies. The companies which attracted the most interest from investors were mainly in the retail sector. The top 10 companies most in demand were Shoprite, Woolworths, Brait, Naspers, Foschini, Clicks, Truworths, Bidvest, Spar and Mediclinic. Most of the interest was in "SA Inc" stocks such as consumer-related and financial stocks, with much less interest in resource stocks than in previous years. Merrill Lynch head of SA global markets Neil Cohen said the foreigners were very underweight on SA equities and were looking for opportunities and were generally more upbeat on South African equities than the local fund managers were. Most were emerging-market fund managers, and while they were clearly worried about the political environment and the way SA could go, when they compared SA with the turmoil in emerging markets such as Russia, Turkey, and Brazil "SA does not look so bad", Cohen said. Foreign ownership accounts for about 47% of the JSE equities market on a free-float basis, down from a peak of about 53% a year and a half ago. Global emerging-market fund managers have been underweight on SA, which makes up about 7% of the emerging markets benchmark, and were looking to raise their position to neutral. However, while they generally felt SA was past the worst, economically and politically, they were not going to go into SA aggressively, because of the uncertainty about its politics, Merrill Lynch executives said.