I heard an owl call a name last night. It hooted and hooted and hooted. I warned Queenie, our fat little cross-sausage dog, about going outside lest the owl hooked her for a late feast. The fat little growler lifted her head, twitched an ear and sighed her way back to a snore. The fat little sausage is an old-fashioned prop of a dog, a bent back with a poor attitude towards nutrition and less enthusiasm towards training. We have worked on getting Queenie to lose weight. She will have none of it. First to the feeding bowl in the morning, a happy dance before slurping up the chicken gizzards placed there to make the not-cheap diet food a little more palatable. Queenie can find her way around a diet pellet like the sports ministry can a Commonwealth Games bid. She could suck the fun bits out of a chocolate chip rusk and leave you with an intact biscuit. My wife bought me an owl house for Christmas. I haven’t seen it yet. Apparently, it is still in the post. Next year I am buying her a new bicycle. Again. I like bicycles. My wife would like me to buy her one to ride to the shops. Something with a basket and big tyres and a saddle Donald Trump could park his big rump upon with no fuss. I keep promising to buy her one, but I haven’t. I will one day. I have seven bikes. I think. It just happened. I had nine for a spell. I sold a few. Then bought a few more. And then another couple. And then didn’t let them go. It is my weakness, my sporting memorabilia. An old friend, Basil, who looks after my pension, says I am the least materialistic person he knows. He hasn’t seen my bike collection. It is worth a lot and it is worth little. I blame the Cape Town Cycle Tour. I rode my first one in 2000, on a mountain bike — a Sunn, a French brand. Then I bought a bright yellow Trek because, well, I believed Lance when he told me he was honest. Then a silver Specialized Roubaix. I gave that to my late brother Brian after a while. Jamie Ball finished third in the race on a Specialized E5 Tarmac in the 2006 Cycle Tour. I bought it from him. I flew on that bike. At Christmas one year, I gave the E5 to my youngest brother, Barry. Since then, I have owned and sold or given away a Bianchi from Team Barloworld, which had been ridden by Enrico Gasparotto, the Italian pro who had once worn pink at the Giro d’Italia.  Some kind soul stole the Bianchi. Then there was a Trek from MTN-Qhubeka, an old Cervelo, an S-Works Tarmac. All second-hand. There is also a Scott Spark and an Open. I added a Swift Ultravox RS-1 and a Cervelo C5 in 2017. Why? Because they were damn pretty. Via the magic of trading, I got the E5 Tarmac back from Barry, who had passed it on to his ex-wife, Kelly. It is in my shed of bikes. Sunday would have been my 13th or 14th Cycle Tour. In 2016, I lasted all of 30km after destroying a rear tyre. On Monday, while I was in Cape Town, readying for the tour, I took a call from a doctor to tell me Barry, after being badly burned in a horrific incident two weeks before, had gone into cardiac arrest. There is only so much the body can put up with. Barry died on Thursday. I always wanted to ride a Cycle Tour with him. I always wanted to tell him how much I loved him. I always wanted to tell him how much I admired his brain. I never did it enough. I’ll never ride with him again. Today, I will ride around the roads of Joburg for him. I miss you, Barry, more than I ever got to tell you. I heard an owl last night. It called your name.