The Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences Amendment (Aarto) Bill is a long way from being ready for implementation, Business Unity SA (Busa) has told Parliament. Marc Corcoran, who made a submission to the portfolio committee on transport on Thursday, said it was Busa’s considered view that the bill would not improve road traffic safety. He said the bill’s proposed demerit system and other reforms would relegate traffic law violations from offences to mere financial transactions to feed the Road Traffic Infringement Agency (RTIA). "Turning an offence into a mere financial transaction is not correct. A lot more work needs to be done before this house can adopt the bill," said Corcoran. Organised business including Busa and car rental associations, have raised a number of objections against the bill in their submissions to the committee. The National Taxi Association said in its submission to the committee it was concerned about the lack of safeguards for taxi owners facing liability for their drivers’ infringements. Association general secretary Alpheus Mlalazi said that, in its current form, the bill would interfere with taxi owners’ rights to pursue trade. The submission to Parliament on Thursday came against the backdrop of RTIA officials conducting a road show during which they assured the public that the agency had a strategic plan to deal with issues arising from how it would enforce Aarto when it became law. A major issue that has been raised is how the agency would handle the suspension of motorists’ licences, which is one of the provisions of a point demerit system. RTIA registrar Japh Chuwe said the agency had not yet established the capacity required to enforce Aarto provisions, although it was confident it would be able to scale up its human resources to deal with a national roll-out. He was speaking at the launch of new Aarto mobile offices in Soweto on Thursday. Transport Minister Dipuo Peters was also present at the event. Chuwe told Business Day that beyond the focus on the punitive aspects of the bill, Aarto was a holistic response to many new acts covering information and administrative law. Peters said that in Tshwane and Johannesburg alone, 84,411 infringement notices were issued daily, "showing the rate at which people don’t obey rules". "It is because there is no stick to hit them. Aarto is the stick to hit them," said Peters.