The ANC has a lot to digest this week and will have two forums in which to do so: its regular national working committee on Monday; and its national executive committee meeting from Thursday to Sunday. Two significant judgments handed down last week by the courts on decisions taken by ANC Cabinet ministers were setbacks for the government and reflect badly on the governing party. The court judgments come at a time when the ANC is trying to improve its standing with voters. The way it plans to do this is highlighted in its strategy and tactics policy document, which will be discussed at the national policy conference in June. The Constitutional Court judgment on the payment of social grants raised questions about the competence of Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini while the High Court in Pretoria ruled that the appointment of Berning Ntlemeza as head of Hawks by Police Minister Nathi Nhleko was invalid. The agenda for the meeting of the national executive committee will be decided on Monday by the national working committee. Also on Monday, DA leader Mmusi Maimane will visit Msunduzi, KwaZulu-Natal, as part of the Change 19. Tuesday is Human Rights Day, which will be celebrated by the government in King William’s Town with a keynote address by President Jacob Zuma. Provincial functions are also scheduled to take place. Maimane will commemorate Human Rights Day in Sharpeville and will lay a wreath at the site of the Sharpeville massacre of March 21 1960, after which he will conduct a memorial service commemorating those who lost their lives. In attendance will be survivors of the massacre, as well as relatives of the Gauteng psychiatric patients who died in the care of unlicensed nongovernmental organisations (NGOs). The DA’s federal legal commission is expected to investigate the tweets about colonialism by Western Cape premier Helen Zille this week Cosatu will protest against the South African Human Rights Commission because of its alleged failure to deal with two dossiers on the violation of human rights of farm and domestic workers. Cosatu spokesman Sizwe Pamla said pickets would be held in the different provinces. On Wednesday the standing committee on finance will continue its public hearings on transformation of the financial services sector with the Reserve Bank, the Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Commission, Nedbank, the South African Insurance Association, the Black Insurance Owners Association and the Black Management Forum among those scheduled to make presentations. Also on Wednesday, the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries will brief the agriculture portfolio committee on Operation Phakisa for agriculture, rural development and land reform and will respond to issues raised by South African Poultry Association (Sapa) and Food and Allied Workers Union (Fawu) on the challenges facing the poultry industry. On Thursday the justice and correctional services portfolio committee will be briefed by the Office of the Chief Justice and Judicial Administration as well as by the Special Investigating Unit on their budgets and annual performance plans. On Friday the trade and industry portfolio committee will engage with various state-owned enterprises, the Department of Public Enterprises and private companies on the challenges facing industry with respect to local procurement. On Wednesday, Thursday and Friday the standing committee on appropriations and the health portfolio committee will focus on the level of co-ordination and alignment of national and provincial spheres of government in the delivery of health services.