A few weeks ago my nephew, Breandan, was due to line up for the first XV of Trent College in the Natwest Vase, an under-18 schools tournament in England. Trent of Nottingham were to play The Perse School of Cambridge in the semifinal at Allianz Park, the home of Saracens. To gee him up and make it a little more special, I asked Bob Skinstad, now living in London, if he would mind sending Breandan an SMS wishing him luck. The day before, Bob sent him a fine message that told him to tackle low and run hard, and was signed: "All the best, Bob Skinstad." Breandan SMSed me later that day to talk about his father, fighting for his life in ICU after an accident that still seems surreal. He then wrote: "Your friend Bob Skinstad messaged me about my rugby tomorrow." I was miffed. I thought he would be more excited. A former Bok captain, one of the most talented players the game has known, had sent him a message. If I was 16 that would have had me giddy and bragging to my mates. "You do know who Bob is, right?" I replied. "Not off the top of my head," wrote Breandan, and then 10 seconds later. "Wait! Is it Bobby Skinstad! Oh, wow. I only realised it was him now." Jaysus. I have failed in my most important job as an uncle — educating my nephews about sport and its history. Breandan will hope to make his own history on March 29 when they play the Royal Latin College at Twickenham after beating The Perse School 29-15. I was watching via social media and when the final whistle blew, shouted and cheered and cried. I am not sure if I will get over to London to watch him play. I may. We shall see. Life, as it has shown me these past four weeks, holds no certainty. Things take turns too sharp to handle or believe; the impossible, the most unpredictable thing can fall down on you. I spent two days at my brother’s house this week, cleaning it out as we prepare it and ourselves for a life without Barry, my youngest brother who eight days ago lost the fight Breandan and I spoke about. I followed trails of his life from room to room, from bike parts piled up in a corner, to pictures of his dogs, bicycle caps, piles of comics, records, DVDs, CDs — a Peter Pan lair for the man who lived like Pan, for the man who was forever young and will now forever be thus. We found so many memories of Barry, too many. Plates from mountain-bike races he had taken part in, a signed picture from downhill MTB star Josh "RatBoy" Bryceland from a World Cup in Pietermaritzburg. RatBoy has taken a sabbatical from riding World Cups in 2017 to focus on "chilled" riding. Barry would do the same. The house was empty on Thursday morning as I stood outside with his death certificate in my hand. It is short and to the point. He died of "unnatural causes". Last Thursday, five days after Breandan had made the final, Barry, who had seen his eldest son, Conor, last Monday morning and smiled at him before slipping back into the safety of sleep, never woke up. On Friday, St Paddy’s Day, as fine a day for a funeral for man born in Northern Ireland as you could wish for, we will say goodbye to Barry one last time at the same church we said goodbye to Brian, our middle brother, in 2015, and Bill, our father, in 2010. On March 29, Breandan will play in a final with his father cheering him on as he did when he won that Pirates Challenge final in 2016. I remember Barry hugging Breandan and saying: "Love you, my boy." I will send him a message. Many will. On March 29 he will play with the love of his father coursing through him.