There is a feeling you get when you are at a buffet full of the things you love and you think you are full, but you just see that one other tempting morsel sitting on the dessert trolley. That is where Benz is at with the E-Class coupe. It is a niche within a niche within a niche, hoping its style and interior will hit its narrow target audience with sniper-like accuracy. It sits right above the C-Class coupe and right below the S-Class coupe and it should not be confused with the just-shown AMG GT Concept or the upcoming E-Class-based new CLS four-door. And Benz also has SUV "coupes". Its predecessor survived out in the wild for seven years and this one is bigger, smarter, stronger and cleverer in every way, except for the cost of its production. That is because the old one wasn’t an E-Class at all, but a C-Class wearing an E-Class costume, and that largely explains the leaps in every conceivable dimension. This one sits on Benz’s modular rear-drive architecture platform and it has jumped out 123mm in length to 4,826mm, has edged 74mm wider (to 1,860mm) and it is now taller (on the standard steel springs) by 32mm (1,430mm). The handling should theoretically improve, too, with the front and rear tracks rising 67mm and 68mm (to 1,605mm and 1,609mm) giving it a broader, more stable base. Critically, it scored a 113mm stretch in the wheelbase and most of that has been given over to the rear-seat passengers. Space inside is up in an instantly noticeable way in every dimension, from every seat. There is 50mm more shoulder room and 38mm more elbow room in the front seats. It is even better in the rear with another 74mm of knee room. To acquire all of this and to somehow misplace 25l of luggage space (which drops to 425l) seems a bit odd, and Benz’s chassis development people can only put it down to styling. Another thing it puts down to styling is the rediscovered clean side sculpting, which make the slightly curved side panels seem to borrow more than a bit of their surfacing from Jaguar’s brilliant F-Pace. It will start production with a solitary diesel engine and three petrol power plants, though two of them are essentially the same four-cylinder, 2.0l turbo engine with different outputs. The entry-level four-cylinder in the E200 also happens to be the lightest of the models at 1,655kg. It delivers 135kW power at 5,500r/min and 300Nm torque from 1,200r/min. With all the coupes using Benz’s nine-speed automatic transmission, the E200 moves to 100km/h in 7.8 seconds on the way to a 240km/h top speed. Its bigger brother, the E300, uses a 180kW/370Nm version of the same motor, which cuts the 100km/h sprint time down to 6.4 seconds while the top speed is limited to 250km/h. Then there is the big petrol motor in the E400 4Matic, with a short-stroke 2,996cc V6 thumping out 245kW of power and 480Nm of torque. Although it picks up more weight, sitting at 1,845kg, it has enough power and torque to whip that through to 100km/h in 5.1 seconds and force the limiter into action at 250km/h. That is enough to convince Benz to eschew V8 power for the coupe and to keep AMG’s power-packed fingers away from it altogether, in keeping with a philosophy that the car is more about comfort, grace and style than sheer speed. It is also just about the last of the breed, with future Benz sixes moving back to an in-line configuration and shunning the vee angle as it moves to a modular system based around a single 500cc cylinder. That is why it might be churlish to point out that the V6 is less powerful, has less torque and higher consumption than Audi’s similar-sized V6. That leaves the aluminium-block 1,950cc turbodiesel as the only oiler in the family, with 400Nm torque and 143kW power. That it has a claimed 4.0l/100km consumption figure, is far more the point than its 7.4sec sprint to 100km/h. Still, it is 1.1sec quicker than its iron-blocked predecessor. The cars will ride on basic steel springs and fixed-rate dampers, steel springs with actively adjusting dampers or the top-spec air suspension system, with multichamber air springs. All of these match up with the dynamic select system, which lets the driver use a rocker switch on the centre console to tweak the car’s character from eco to comfort to sport and to sport plus. The car loses some sharpness in handling compared to some Benzes (and especially compared to the BMW 6-Series) as it chases comfort. Where you expect it to be at its best, in the E400 4Matic, the all-wheel drive system sucks any intuitive connection with the road out of the car’s steering and leaves it oddly unsatisfying. The base diesel model is not exactly a sparkler either, except on highways, where its quietness and unshakeable feeling of engineering-without-shortcuts comes through the most. It is respectable, solid, calmly efficient and shines brightest at the fuel pump, but be warned: you will be there more frequently than you were in the superseded one. The fuel tank has shrunk to 50l. The petrol cars use a 66l tank. The pick of the litter is actually the strongest of the four-cylinder motors. The base version is a nice enough car, delivering more steering accuracy and response than the diesel or the V6 petrol cars manage, but it could be smoother at middle revs and it could do with more gristle in patches. Still, the light weight over the front axle helps it to corner with an agility that the others lack and it slightly tilts the car’s emphasis from calm and serene to offer a bit of handling fun. That fun is exaggerated by the extra gristle in the E300’s engine, though there’s a bit of pump whine in it at some revs. With the handling balance of the car set up well, it tips into corners with alacrity and verve, without ever losing its feeling of serenity and dignity, while the weighting of the steering delivers more weight as the forces start to pile up. While it looks overtly sporty, it handles with a clear tilt towards comfort and so even this, the sportiest of the coupes, allows the fun to come through and then pulls back to revert into its calm and dignified posture. We expected more from the E400 4Matic and didn’t get it. It sticks with the family Plan A of grace and composure, with its air body control air suspension doing a terrific job of calming the road and cornering forces and turning them into things rather more gentle than they deserve to be. But the bland steering deadens a driver’s enthusiasm for hard cornering, though it is more than competent, the body control is superb and its preference for comfort never falls too far into feeling clumsy. Its favoured place to play is open highways and city centres, where the outer edges of its grip levels are unlikely to be taxed as frequently. Besides that highway character, the real star of the show is the interior. Audi has the reputation for delivering the best, cleanest, easiest to use and classiest interiors in the premium world, but that could quickly get upset if Benz keeps going in the E-Class coupe’s direction. It borrows a lot from the E-Class, but it adds a lot of its own stuff, including new turbine air vents that look special, retractable arms to push the seat belts forward for the front seats and unique wood and trim parts. For all their gorgeousness, the vents themselves don’t live up to their luxury look when you touch them, because you can feel the rough edges of plastic every time you use them to redirect air. While the entry-level cars use a pair of rotary dials, the coupe can be specced up to take a pair of 12.3-inch display screens that double as multimedia screens and the instrument cluster, while there is also a head-up display if that is all too much for you. The rear seat gets the biggest leap forward, and it is now comfortable enough for two adults to travel some distance in. It can take twice the number of big people as before, but with less luggage capacity than when it could only really carry two adults and two kids. It is a far better long-distance cruise than all of its rivals (bar, maybe, the ageing Audi A7), but with (on the diesel) a shorter range. But for people who like the sort of car that places dignity over speed, comfort over handling and stunning interior design over luggage space, it will be nearly perfect.