Multi-national water innovation company, Crystal Lagoons — which "allows lagoons of unlimited sizes to be built and maintained at very low costs" — has partnered with developer Balwin Properties for the construction and operation of SA’s first Crystal Lagoon, to "bring beach life to Gauteng". Balwin develops sectional title residential estates in high-density metropolitan nodes. The company listed in October 2015, with the support of billionaire investor Jonathan Beare and his company, Buffet Investments, which took a large shareholding in the group. The group is building a new R4.2bn residential development, The Blyde at Riverwalk Estate, in Pretoria East, Gauteng. It said this development would showcase Crystal Lagoons’ technology, which it has patented in 190 countries. The technology involves the creation of water features which allow swimming, kayaking, paddle boarding and sailing. The Blyde will become one of 600 Crystal Lagoons projects in different stages of development and negotiation in more than 60 countries. "At 1.5 hectares, which is equivalent to just over two rugby fields, the Crystal Lagoon will be a key selling point for the development, and be the first lagoon to feature our game-changing technology and unique concept in sub-Saharan Africa," said Alastair Sinclair, regional director for Africa at Crystal Lagoons. The company was formed about 10 years ago by Chilean scientist and property developer, Fernando Fischmann. "We are very excited about our partnership with Crystal Lagoons and see this as the first of at least six lagoons in SA combined with the Balwin brand," said Stephen Brookes, CEO of Balwin. "The development will include a fully equipped gym, squash court, restaurant, concierge, laundromat, cinema room and a function room as well as state of the art security. The promenade around the lagoon is perfect for sunset strolls and will connect the different amenities around the lagoon." According to Sinclair, Crystal Lagoons can use any type of water — fresh, salt or brackish "to provide a sustainable solution for the efficient use of water resources".