Durban — Bafana Bafana make a fresh start — despite uncertainty over the availability of midfielder Kamohelo Mokotjo, their standing in World Cup qualifiers and even who will be their new coach — as they take on Guinea-Bissau in Durban on Saturday. Caretaker coach Owen da Gama has selected a squad packed with in-form Premier Soccer League players and young talent, combined with the core of the team that beat Senegal 2-1 in a now-disputed World Cup qualifier in November. The friendly international at Moses Mabhida Stadium precedes another, against Angola in East London, on Tuesday. It is a squad that promises much and the new blood seems set to ensure competitive outings from Bafana in these two matches, with places to play for in the big away-and-home Russia 2018 qualifiers against Cape Verde Islands later in 2017. One uncertainty stems from this being a team in limbo, sacked Shakes Mashaba’s former assistant Da Gama taking over as caretaker. Another is over Mokotjo, with Da Gama saying on Thursday he was still awaiting approval from the South African Football Association, who in turn are waiting on Home Affairs, to find out if Mokotjo is eligible after complications stemming from the FC Twente player receiving Dutch citizenship. Bafana also face the prospect of having to replay their qualifier against Senegal after findings of match fixing. Da Gama said Bafana’s focus this week had been on the field. "The focus is on the next two games. Administrative things we don’t focus on," he said. From the way Da Gama and his captain, Itumeleng Khune, spoke, the adventurous squad and tension of waiting for a new coach have created more of a "winds of change" atmosphere of excitement and anticipation than one of anxiety. As Guinea-Bissau, like Cape Verde, have strong ties with Portugal, where many of their players are based, the friendly could be ideal preparation. The world’s 80th-ranked team should also be no pushovers for 62nd-placed SA. The West Africans, from a country with a population of 1.7-million, reached their first Africa Cup of Nations finals in 2017. They drew against hosts Gabon and lost narrowly against eventual winners Cameroon. "Guinea-Bissau are one of the countries who really want to prove that they are going places. They caught a lot of people by surprise at the Nations Cup," said Da Gama.