The ANC wants a "recalibration" of macroeconomic policy to promote reforms required for growth, according to its draft discussion documents. The party is under pressure to deal with a limping economy, characterised by low growth and high unemployment. President Jacob Zuma and his supporters have also mounted a renewed push for "radical economic transformation". But the ANC documents are cautious about how economic redress should be handled, in what can read as a sign that the issue will be contentious at its policy conference in June. The conference is a precursor to the party’s elective congress in December at which its policies will be adopted. The documents were discussed at a special national executive committee meeting last week and sent back for further revision. A radical economic transformation, according to the documents, is about "fundamentally changing the structure of the South African economy". The ANC’s programme should be measured by the extent to which it "radically and systematically improves the lives and opportunities of those marginalised and excluded". "It is not about how radical sounding the programme is or about how radical its instruments and interventions appear to be," the papers said. SA’s economic policy stance had to be more "effectively recalibrated to promote … reforms required for growth". Fiscal policy should be used as a key instrument for reconstruction and development. Macroeconomic policy should also widen its focus to "include [building] confidence in the South African economy". The policy papers propose a detailed investigation into the "underlying structure" of the economy to dismantle monopoly practices and structures — one of the objectives of radical transformation. Such transformation also had to have a "mass character" to increase black participation in the economy. The South African Communist Party has criticised the calls for radical transformation, saying they were mere "rhetoric" aimed at enriching the elite. Cosatu cautiously welcomed the ANC’s renewed focus on transforming the economy, but pointed out it was nothing new. "The ANC has no other choice … because failure … will result in the movement being impeached by this economy in 2019," the federation said.