Jason Drew, CEO of AgriProtein, the first and largest commercial-scale insect meal producer in the world, is a man in a hurry. He has a planet to save and he&rsquo;s using pesky flies to do so.Every day, at least 25,000 people die of starvation and the seas will soon be depleted of fish. Canada&rsquo;s great fishing industry has already collapsed and Britain&rsquo;s is threatened. People all over the globe aren&rsquo;t getting enough protein to survive, let alone thrive.Some years ago, the entrepreneurial Drew, author of two books on the perilous state of the environment, saw a huge pool of blood with a thick cloud of flies hovering over it outside a chicken slaughterhouse near Stellenbosch. Its manager told Drew that a Stellenbosch University professor had told him that flies could be used to recycle the waste blood to make useable protein.Drew knew that in nature, both chicken and stream-inhabiting fish eat flies, not the fishmeal they are fed by humans. Trawlers produce fishmeal "in one of the most destructive activities on the planet", he says. In 2008, assisted by scientists, researchers, farmers and his brother David, Drew created AgriProtein. Today, it is valued at about R1.5bn.In a 9,000m&sup2; fly farm near Cape Town airport, the company produces high-protein insect meal for animal feed by rearing black soldier fly larvae on organic waste that would otherwise go into landfills.Over the past few years, Drew&rsquo;s visionary approach to repairing the environment, tackling the waste crisis and feeding natural food to the animals humans eat has been rewarded with several international awards and has attracted big investors.In January, AgriProtein made the Cleantech Group&rsquo;s 100 list of the most innovative and promising ideas that are having an impact on the future of a range of industries.It was chosen from 9,900 companies in 77 countries.In February, international engineering group Christof Industries signed a $10m deal with AgriProtein to establish 100 fly farms throughout the world by 2024."Thanks to Christof, we now have a prototype for our factories, a model so detailed that it prescribes the thickness of a screw," says Drew.AgriProtein had "a fairly good factory, but we wanted to make it outstanding to increase production", he says.So, the business teamed up with the Christof Group, which re-engineered the premises."We spent millions on our factory at Philippi, which we started building in 2012. It has been an endless series of failures, ranging from machines that didn&rsquo;t work to burst pipes covering us in muck," says Drew. "But success is defined by a series of small failures that you overcome &mdash; repeatedly."AgriProtein now has factories operating worldwide. They process the larvae of the black soldier fly on an industrial scale to produce MagMeal, which is 55% protein and 100% sustainable natural organic animal feed. MagOil is a versatile, natural, omega-rich oil used in feeds. The by-product, MagSoil, is a high-quality compost.A standard fly farm uses 8.5-billion flies and takes in 250 tonnes of organic waste a day. It produces nearly 5,000 tonnes of MagMeal and 2,000 tonnes of MagOil annually.AgriProtein focused on researching the genetics of the black soldier fly because they exist almost everywhere in the world and all they do in their lifespan is mate and lay eggs."In Cape Town, our flies lay about 162-million eggs a day. We put them on waste that comes from the City of Cape Town, grow them and then harvest them," says Drew.Waste-to-nutrient technology is starting to gain traction, and price per tonne is key in the fight to replace fishmeal as food for farmed animals.AgriProtein uses any organic waste, including potato peels from chip factories and leftovers from canteens at big firms."Our factory in Hanoi, Vietnam, said it was getting all its waste from Samsung canteens because about 20,000 people work there. That translates into thousands of tonnes a day of waste," says Drew.AgriProtein plans to build 200 fly farms by 2027, working with its licensees in Europe, Asia, Australia and the Americas. Some of the licensees in the US, Hong Kong, Saudi Arabia and Chile have worked with the company for two years."They enable us to find entrepreneurial managers far more quickly than if we tried to do it all ourselves," says Drew.AgriProtein has a research centre in Cape Town that focuses on genetics. At Guelph in Canada, they are examining the antibiotic nature of larvae to treat wounds. "We&rsquo;ve isolated particular parts of the protein and hope to put that into animal feed so that (medicinal) antibiotics will no longer need to be used," Drew says.In Asia, the firm&rsquo;s research will focus on insect etymology, studying how black soldier flies choose mates and lay eggs. "We don&rsquo;t even know how much we don&rsquo;t know," says Drew.He gives talks all over the world, telling people about the environmental crisis and what can be done to mitigate it.AgriProtein plans to do "something quite extraordinary" in 2017, he says. "We plan to create the world s first Zfifo farm zero fish in to fish out. Currently, all fish farms take in more fish from the wild [to feed their own] than they produce."Drew dreams of a world in which all human waste is fed, via fly larvae, to farmed fish, "so we wouldn t need to catch any from the sea. That would exclude subsistence fishermen."British-born Drew, who has lived in SA for nearly two decades, retired from leadership roles in multinationals after he had two heart attacks. He settled on his Tulbagh farm with his wife and three children and walked himself fit, keeping track of the changing seasons, drying-up streams, soil erosion and wind damage. He then began to study nature, reading all he could on global water, land usage and the fragile oceans.He travelled the world, from Saudi Arabia to the Americas, Europe and the Middle and Far East to establish for himself how the environment was faring.Drew returned shocked and determined to do something, ignoring the bleats of doomsayers. "If you can t do something then you should get out of the way of someone who s already doing it," he says."After we ve saved the seas, we ll find something else to do."