Trade unions have lashed out at the threat to public sector employment contained in the 2017-18 budget. Treasury has indicated the compensation budgets of national and provincial departments will be reduced by R10bn in 2017-18 and R15bn in 2018-19, which will mean a reduction in head counts. The parliamentary liaison officer for the National Education, Health and Allied Workers Union (Nehawu), Tengo Tengewa, told MPs during public hearings on the budget by Parliament’s finance committees that general administration workers were in line for a "drastic cut" in numbers. "It is regrettable to note that Treasury is still stuck in the old neoliberal rationality that sees the compensation of employees as wasteful compensation expenditure," Tengewa said. "Such spending is actually investment in human development and actually makes economic growth sustainable and contributes towards social cohesion. "In our view reducing the spending ceilings narrowly focused on targeting public service wages actually contracts and undermines economic growth." The sections of the public service targeted were critical for service delivery to the poor, which would suffer if numbers were reduced, Tengewa said. Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu) parliamentary liaison officer Matthew Parks said the federation was also worried about government’s austerity approach to the public service, which he said "was having a negative impact upon critical public service vacancies, in particular in health, education, social development, police and correctional services". What was needed was rather to consolidate departments, municipalities, agencies and state-owned enterprises, "to avoid the narrow view on how to reduce the wage bill by simply freezing posts". Parks said Cosatu had hoped to see more commitments from government in the budget to reduce real wasteful expenditure and corruption. "Cosatu believes that more wasteful expenditure can be cut from departments and municipalities’ catering, travel and advertising budget lines," Parks said. "Business-class travel must end for all, regardless of status and length of travel. Travel allowances must be reduced. Other perks of office must be ended. There is no need to pay for daily bouquets of flowers for office bearers."