The government must act against those who were involved in the social grants fiasco, the ANC said on Friday. Following the Constitutional Court’s judgment, which was scathing of Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini, the ANC also called for "harsh consequences management". Archbishop Emeritus Njongonkulu Ndungane added his voice to the chorus of disapproval of the minister. “Her arrogance in this entire situation is breathtaking," he said on Friday in a statement welcoming the court's decision. “South Africa owes a debt of gratitude to the independence of the judiciary in general and in particular to its esteemed Constitutional Court," he said. He was pleased that three-monthly reports to the court were required. "It means that someone with an understanding of good governance will be watching her and Sassa like hawks." ANC spokesman Zizi Kodwa said: "Government must thoroughly investigate actions of those involved and act decisively against those responsible for this embarrassing and undesirable situation. "It is unacceptable that such a critical aspect of our social security net, affecting the security and livelihood of the most vulnerable in our country, was not dealt with much better in a speedy manner to avoid the unnecessary panic and anxiety caused." The Constitutional Court ordered that the contract between the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) and Cash Paymaster Services (CPS) be extended for 12 months from April 1 to ensure that grants are paid. The same court in 2014 found the contract between CPS and Sassa to be invalid but suspended the invalidity. The court on Friday also extended the suspension of the invalidity. It also found that Dlamini was responsible for the social grants crisis and gave her until the end of the month to motivate why she should not be held personally responsible for the costs of the matter. On Thursday, President Jacob Zuma dismissed calls for him to fire Dlamini. The ANC welcomed Friday’s judgment. "The ANC holds the view that the regrettable events over the past few weeks were unnecessary and should have never happened. "Accordingly, we call on the Department of Social Development to immediately initiate a process to right the wrongs committed and fully comply with the directives of the Constitutional Court and the prescripts of the law," Kodwa said.