The World Health Organisation (WHO) has lauded SA for tackling diabetes and obesity. The organisation said the country had set a good example for other countries with its efforts to implement a tax to help curb the consumption of sugar, adding that it "strongly supports" the sugar tax on beverages. On Thursday Brand SA flagged the WHO’s recognition on its website. During his budget speech in February‚ finance minister Pravin Gordhan said the tax would come into effect once legislation was finalised. "By implementing a tax on sugary drinks to increase the prices of these beverages‚ SA will be taking a proactive step to reduce the intake of sugars‚ which contribute to unhealthy weight gain and other diet-related NCDs [noncommunicable diseases]‚ including diabetes‚" said Dr Rufaro Chatora‚ the WHO’s representative to SA. "SA’s stance on sugary drinks‚ and other products that impact on health‚ such as tobacco and alcohol‚ sets an example for other countries to follow. By taking such actions‚ SA is demonstrating that with political commitment and investment in health promotion that it is possible to beat back the scourge of NCDs‚ including diabetes and obesity." About 16-million people die a year of NCDs and WHO member states have pledged to stop the rise of obesity and diabetes. But the Beverage Association of SA does not agree with the tax. In a statement issued after Gordhan’s speech‚ the association announced that it was "extremely disappointed" in the announcement of the "discriminatory tax". "There is mounting data showing that taxing one small part of the consumer’s daily diet — sugar-sweetened beverages represent less than 10% of daily caloric intake — will not result in any significant decrease in overall sugar consumption‚" the association’s said in a statement. "The recent ITAM [Mexico Autonomous Institute of Technology] report on the tax on sugar-sweetened beverages in Mexico‚ for example‚ revealed a minimal reduction of actual calories consumed. When accounting for the real-world substitution on other foods containing sugar‚ experts estimate a maximum reduction of six calories realised in the daily diet." TMG Digital