Following the release of the report by the National Minimum Wage Advisory Panel, there has been much discussion about the level, and impact of the level, proposed by the panel. Surprisingly, there has been little, if any, debate on the panel’s proposal that the national minimum wage be based on an hourly, rather than a monthly, wage. In SA, wages are generally benchmarked at a monthly or yearly rate. Indeed, very few waged workers and salaried professionals would be able to tell you their hourly wage. Why, then, did the panel depart from the general practice and propose a minimum hourly – rather than monthly – rate? As the agreement reached at Nedlac was consistent with the panel’s proposal for the national minimum wage to be based on an hourly wage, it is important that the public understands the basis for the recommendation. The panel proposed a minimum wage of R20 per hour (with a provision for a minimum number of hours worked at four hours). This equates to a monthly figure of R3,440 for those who work 40 hours per week, and R3,870 for those who work 45 hours a week. However, many people work nonstandard hours. Indeed, many part-time workers work a fraction of these hours, while others work longer hours. In addition, there are a range of provisions for hours of work in bargaining council agreements and sectoral determinations. Although the Basic Conditions of Employment Act sets a maximum of 45 ordinary hours of work in any week, the act commits to a progressive reduction to 40 hours, but this is far from being realised. While ordinary hours of work are variable across sectors and numerous provisions apply across sections of the economy, a national minimum wage applies across the entire economy, and should apply to everyone. It should also be easy to understand, and simple to calculate. Importantly, if all citizens understand it and it is easily discussed in the public discourse, the task of enforcing the national minimum wage is made much simpler and more effective. A level of R20 per hour fulfills these requirements. According to the data in the 2015 Labour Market Dynamics report, the majority of workers who earn less than R3,500 per month work about 41 hours per week. For these workers a minimum wage of R20 per hour equates to about R3,500 per month, which is why this figure has been so visible in the press, and in discussions about the minimum wage. However, this obscures significant variation in working hours for low-earning employees. Indeed, there are many ways to earn a wage of about R3,500. One could work for 16 hours a week, earning R50 per hour, or one could work for 60 hours per week earning less than R14 per hour. And the data support this: for those workers currently earning less than R3,500 per month, many report working 45, 50 and up to 60 hours per week, while a smaller number report working up to 85-hour weeks. Indeed, many workers work long hours at very low wages to earn a living. This is not at all surprising. Workers who earn very low wages often have only one means of increasing their incomes – offering themselves for more and more work. One example is the security industry, where long days comprising 12-hour shifts and more are common. Setting an hourly minimum wage ensures a fair wage floor based on remuneration per hour of work, and will prevent employers from extending working hours to meet a monthly minimum wage target. In summary, an hourly wage is easy to understand, easy to monitor, and easy to enforce, and does not require complicated adjustments to compare wages where working hours are different. This discussion of working hours is important because we do have evidence in SA that higher minimum wages can lead to a reduction in working hours. A good example of this comes from the domestic work sector. Prior to the introduction of a minimum wage for domestic workers there was a lot of concern about possible disemployment impacts. The evidence we have now suggests that, rather than a reduction in the number of jobs, the minimum wage led to a reduction in the working hours of domestic workers. So, will employers reduce working hours to meet some of the increased costs of labour arising from the national minimum wage? To a limited extent, the answer is yes, but whether this is necessarily detrimental to workers deserves further discussion here. The first point to emphasise is, as noted above, that working hours are regulated both by bargaining council agreements and by sectoral determinations, and so employers are not permitted to make unilateral adjustments to working hours. Thus there is unlikely to be a significant and unilateral change in working hours. Any changes will probably be managed over time, within the industrial relations institutions that operate in SA. However, many workers work longer hours than the minima stipulated in the relevant agreements. In many such work situations, workers are working long hours because their wages are so low. In such cases, a higher minimum wage and a reduction in hours of work may well be a desirable outcome from a social and economic perspective. For example, there are sectors such as security and domestic work that are characterised by low hourly wages, and very long working hours. In these sectors, the hourly minimum wage will probably have the effect of reducing working hours while total monthly pay remains the same, or increases. Same pay, less work A simple example is illustrative. Take an electrician’s assistant who currently earns R3,500 per month for a 45-hour working week (nine hours per day, five days per week). The current hourly wage for this employee is slightly less than R17 per hour. Assuming that the employer can only afford to pay R3,500 per month, following the implementation of the minimum wage at R20 per hour the employer will have to reduce the working hours to 41 hours per week. Clearly, the employee is better off, as she earns the same monthly salary for fewer hours of work. This gives her more time to spend on her own endeavours. The employer may also be better off – workers who work more reasonable hours are likely to be more productive than workers who work extremely long hours. Furthermore, a beneficial reduction in working hours is in line with existing legislation. As mentioned above, the Basic Conditions of Employment Act commits to this. Schedule 1 of the act is titled Procedures for Progressive Reduction of Maximum Working Hours, and the intention is to reduce the working hours of employees to a 40-hour working week and an eight-hour day (whether through collective bargaining or sectoral determination), having regard to the effect of such a reduction on employment and employment opportunities. The key point is that a reduction in working hours that is not accompanied by a reduction in monthly pay is unequivocally a good thing for employees, as it reduces the time they have to work to earn a given wage, and allows them more time to pursue their own endeavours. It is also likely to be in the interests of employers. • Prof Valodia chairs the National Minimum Wage Advisory Panel