Elgin — The respective men’s and women’s leaders had vastly contrasting fortunes on the 112km stage 4 of the Absa Cape Epic from Greyton to Elgin on Thursday. While the men’s leaders, Manuel Fumic and Henrique Avancini (Cannondale Factory Racing XC), were having their lead slashed by some superb teamwork, Esther Suss and Jennie Stenerhag (Meerendal CBC) were taking full advantage of their main rivals’ bad luck to grow their advantage in the Hansgrohe Women’s category. The stage was won by race debutants Andri Frischknecht and Michiel van der Heijden (Scott-Sram Young Guns) who crossed the line just ahead of 2016 Olympic champion Nino Schurter and Matthias Stirnemann (Scott-Sram MTB Racing) who moved into second position overall. The Young Guns and their senior MTB Racing team both finished in 4hr 10min after working together to extend their advantage over the final 15km, but more relevant was that Schurter and Stirnemann gained two-and-a-half minutes on Fumic and Avancini with just three stages remaining. And with 2012 Olympic Champion Jaroslav Kulhavy cutting his tyre on a sharp rock, the Investec-Songo-Specialized pairing of Kulhavy and five-time race winner Christoph Sauser dropped to third, leaving the top three teams all within 2min 15sec of each other. "We never ride with a plan — we just like to ride," said Schurter. "Today it worked out very well for both our teams, so that’s fantastic. The last big climb was terrible, very sandy, but both our teams seemed to manage it best and we were able to get away." Said Sauser: "We woke up this morning with the intention of making a move and trying to ride into the yellow jersey. "Jaro must have ridden over 1,000 rocks and right at the end he managed to hit one that tore his sidewall. We used two plugs, but kept losing air. We put a third plug in, but it cost us a lot of time. Tomorrow will be tough to make up time, but there is the big stage on Saturday to come." In the Hansgrohe Women’s race Suss and Stenerhag expanded their lead over Sabine Spitz and Robyn de Groot (Ascendis Health) by just under 4min when Spitz sliced the sidewall of her front tyre. Suss and Stenerhag now take a 12min advantage into Friday’s 84km blast around the sublime Oak Valley trails. The time lost repairing their tyre allowed the young Hansgrohe Cadence OMX Pro team of Mariske Strauss and Annie Last to claim their best ever finish as they crossed the line second, 3min behind the leaders. "We had a really bad sidewall cut pretty much on the pressure point on the day," said De Groot. "It was just really bad luck and our day changed from a matter of trying to gain anything we could on the leaders to rather trying to limit our losses. "The first portion of the climb was quite sandy with some sharp rocks and Sabine must have hit one at just the wrong angle. Her tyre was cut badly and went flat straight away." Stenerhag was content to have extended their overall lead to a solid 12min 40sec.