South African bonds remained extremely weak, but off the morning’s worst levels in mid-day trade on Friday, having weakened by between 35 and 50 basis points after a major midnight Cabinet shake-up that saw Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan removed from his post and replaced by former home affairs minister Malusi Gigaba, The news sent the country’s markets into a tailspin, with the rand plummeting more than 6% from a best level of R12.79 to the dollar on Thursday to R13.6282 in opening trade on Friday. The benchmark R186 bond spiked by 50 basis points to 9.9% which, Gordhan told a mid-morning news briefing on his sacking, would cost the government more to borrow money. "We were hoping to raise R600m today [at Friday’s government bond auction], but only received bids for R200m because of concern," he said. The stock exchange and debt service costs had also moved with the developments. "We have been doing our best to reassure rating agencies, investors and South Africans that finances are safe in our hands." Gordhan was greeted at the briefing by thunderous applause and a standing ovation. "We learned our fate from a TV screen, not from any chat or phone call," he told journalists. Nomura emerging-markets analyst Peter Attard Montalto said the market would struggle to digest the appointment of Gigaba, who had been effective at home affairs, but was "clearly being put in a role to do a particular job by Zuma and viewed as loyal to Zuma". "The market had been far too complacent that Zuma could not remove Gordhan, but he has now gone and done it — and yet the market is still hanging onto the hope of a credible candidate, which has not come, with a complete clear-out at National Treasury," Attard Montalto said. "This is a full whack Zuma-led reshuffle which will lead to multiple imminent downgrades where Zuma is confident he has the upper-hand over weak internal ANC opposition." TreasuryOne forex dealer, John Moni, said: "The rand is smashed across the board with the biggest shake-up in ages for our economy. As it stands, there is a strong probability that we will get downgraded by all three rating agencies, the first of which will be in three months. It is a sea of red for everything South African, from bonds to the banking sector — everything is down" At noon, the yield on the benchmark R186 bond was at 8.86% from 8.495% on Thursday, and the R207 was at 7.77% from 7.505% previously. The rand was last at R13.4116 against the dollar from R13.2644 at its previous close.