The ANC has indicated that the legislative process to move Matatiele back to KwaZulu-Natal could be finalised at the end of 2017, keeping its coalition with the African Independent Congress (AIC) intact for now. The AIC and ANC were meant to meet on Wednesday to sign a memorandum of understanding, but the meeting was postponed because of the social grants debacle. Minister in the Presidency Jeff Radebe, who is leading the ANC team dealing with the AIC, asked to have the meeting postponed so that he could deal with the social grants debacle. He could not be reached for comment. The ANC and AIC have each set up a "five-a-side" team to deal with the matter. The ANC team is made up of officials from KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape. Matatiele was moved from KwaZulu-Natal to the Eastern Cape in 2005. The AIC has been fighting for it to be reincorporated into KwaZulu-Natal since 2009. AIC leader Mandla Galo told Business Day on Thursday that the meeting with the ANC had been postponed until Saturday, but his party was confident about the ANC’s commitment to the process. "What is good about this kind of a process is they have sent us a document where they have indicated the timeframes, where the distribution of draft bills among cabinet members will kick in — in April — which means therefore all legislative processes follow suit up until the bill is passed by the National Assembly in December and the Constitution will be amended," he said. "That is what we expected from them." A two-thirds majority would be needed in the National Assembly to change the Constitution. It is not clear whether opposition parties will vote with the ANC and AIC to return Matatiele to KwaZulu-Natal. In a referendum in 2009, residents voted to return Matatiele to KwaZulu-Natal. However, the AIC complained that nothing had happened since then, even though the party had met President Jacob Zuma about the matter. In January, ANC deputy secretary-general Jessie Duarte said the party was concerned there was an unabated "vociferous campaign", but people needed to remember this was about a provincial boundary. She said the matter needed to go through Parliament. The ANC entered into a coalition deal with the AIC after the August local government elections, which resulted in the governing party retaining Ekurhuleni, the only metro it controls in Gauteng, and Rustenburg in the North West. Without the AIC, the ANC could lose control of the municipalities. The loss of Ekurhuleni would mean the ANC would not have control of any of Gauteng’s metros. The coalition seemed to be on the brink of collapse earlier in 2017, when the AIC accused the ANC of dragging its feet on the Matatiele matter.