President Jacob Zuma has dismissed calls for him to fire Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini and Communications Minister Faith Muthambi, saying it would be premature and essentially violate the rule of law. Dlamini and Muthambi, regarded as Zuma’s close allies, are facing calls to step down or be dismissed after failing to execute their duties. Dlamini is blamed for the social grants crisis, while Muthambi is being held liable for the collapse of governance at the SABC. During a heated question and answer session in the National Assembly on Thursday, Zuma also said the ANC was well within its rights to deploy erstwhile Eskom boss Brian Molefe to Parliament. Molefe resigned as CEO of Eskom in November 2016 after being accused by former public protector Thuli Madonsela in her State of Capture report of having a corrupt relationship with members of the Gupta family, who benefited unduly from the utility’s coal contracts. He was recently sworn in as MP, which fuelled speculation about a pending Cabinet reshuffle. Many believe Zuma wants Molefe to replace Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan or his deputy, Mcebisi Jonas. Zuma refused to answer a question on whether Molefe will soon be appointed to a Cabinet position. "The appointment of persons to the executive is the prerogative of the president of the Republic as outlined in the Constitution. The president communicates publicly if he takes such a decision." He said Molefe’s presence in Parliament did not "diminish" the house in any way. Zuma, who is challenging the state of capture report, said Madonsela had treated him unfairly as she had not given him enough time to respond to her questions. He told MPs that it would be premature to "evaluate" or dismiss Dlamini and Muthambi. DA leader Mmusi Maimane had asked Zuma if he did not "believe it’s time … to act and remove Dlamini from Cabinet" after her mishandling of the social grants crisis. "I thought the date that we are talking about (April 1) has not arrived. Now this is another kind of democracy … you suspect that someone will fail or make a mistake then you punish them before it happens … to act as if the April 1 has come and pensioners grants have not been paid," Zuma responded. "It’s a funny democracy (when) you punish someone before they make a mistake. It’s almost like the law of the jungle. I (punish) you before you commit a crime. There is no crisis. I disagree." Zuma said he had been briefed on the grants matter and officials from the Treasury and the Department of Social Development were working to deal with the issues. He remained confident the grants would be paid on April 1. Responding to questions on Muthambi, Zuma said it would be also premature for him to act as the minister had launched a legal challenge over Parliament’s ad hoc committee report on the SABC. Parliament adopted the damning ad hoc report in March, detailing the collapse of governance at the SABC. It blamed Muthambi for the crisis. The report sharply criticises Muthambi’s incompetence in carrying out her responsibilities as the shareholder representative, including by appointing Hlaudi Motsoeneng as permanent chief operating officer. It recommends that Zuma  "seriously reconsider the desirability of this minister retaining the communications portfolio". Zuma said: "There has been a report and she is taking [it] on review. Why should we evaluate her before the courts have finalised the matter?" Muthambi is seeking a court order to interdict the report’s recommendations — specifically those concerning her — from being implemented while the matter is under review. Muthambi is arguing that the report violated her constitutional rights and was an abuse of parliamentary processes. She says that she was ambushed for political reasons as she was never provided with the proper details of the allegations against her and therefore was "substantially prejudiced". This week, acting speaker of the National Assembly Lechesa Tsenodi responded to Muthambi’s letter in which she expressed dissatisfaction with elements of the ad hoc committee report. "Parliament wishes to state that the Speaker of the National Assembly has no powers to overturn resolutions adopted by the House," Tsenodi said in a statement. Muthambi’s spokesman Mish Molakeng said on Thursday that the letter to Parliament was not asking the speaker to overturn the report, but  sought only to express her  dissatisfaction. He said that  the communications ministry would foot the legal bill for the judicial review. The DA said last week Muthambi should pay the legal costs out of her own pocket. "The minister is taking the matter for review, not in her personal capacity, but as the minister of communications," Molakeng said.