Lawyers for the Department of Social Development and the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) have been "working around the clock" to reply to questions posed by Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng about the contract to pay social grants. The Constitutional Court gave them until 4pm on Monday to file their answers. Their attorney, Tim Sukazi, said the legal team had been working hard "It’s been tough, not only because of this deadline but because there are … other legal processes in government which needed to happen and paperwork which needed to be prepared," Sukazi said. "We managed to achieve quite a few things, now we are focused on filing at 4pm. That should happen." Last week, Mogoeng instructed Sassa to inform the Constitutional Court whether it had entered into a new contract with Cash Paymaster Services (CPS), and if so provide full details of the agreement. The chief justice sent a list of questions wanting to know, among other things, who had decided that Sassa would not be able to take over the paying of grants on April 1, when the decision was made and why the court was not informed. The directive forces Sassa’s hand to be more transparent and reveal details of its agreement with CPS. Here is the full list of questions Mogoeng is expecting answers to: 1. In view of the fact that this court’s order of November 25, 2015, discharging its supervisory jurisdiction, was based on Sassa’s decision not to award a new contract and on Sassa’s progress report of November 5 2015 setting out the information relating to its own ability to assume paying the grants at the end of March 2017, the following information is required: a. Who was the person responsible for determining on behalf of Sassa whether Sassa itself would not be able to pay grants by end of March 2017? b. The date when the responsible person on behalf of Sassa first became aware that it would not be able to pay grants itself by end March 2017? c. The exact dates when the responsible person on behalf of Sassa became aware that the respective time frames set out in paragraph 13 of its progress report to the court could not be fulfilled? d. The reason why this court was not immediately informed of this fact and who made the decision that it was not necessary to do so? e. Whether the minister was informed that Sassa would not be able to pay the grants itself by end of March 2017 and, if so, when this happened? 2. In relation to the legal opinion attached to the follow-up report and Sassa’s assertion that it has taken steps to act on the advice contained in it, as well as Sassa’s intended course of action, the following information is required: a. Has Sassa entered into any agreement with Cash Paymaster Services (Pty) Limited (CPS) in relation to the payment of grants from April 1 2017? b. If so, full details of the agreement are required. If in writing, a copy is required c. Is it Sassa’s contention that this agreement is lawful and in compliance with the procurement requirements of the Constitution and applicable legislation? Full details are required of the steps taken in compliance with applicable procurement legislation. d. Full details are required of the steps taken, or envisaged, to run a competitive bidding process again to have a new contractor or contractors appointed for the payment of grants, and the exact timeframe within which this will occur. e. Full details are required of the steps taken to ensure that Sassa itself will become capable of administering and paying the grants in future, and the exact timeframe within which this will occur. 3. In view of the minister’s and Sassa’s acceptance of responsibility for delays in identifying and redressing deficiencies in the plan since the last report to the court on November 5 2015, to date the following information is required: a. Do Sassa and/or the minister have any objection to independent monitoring of any agreement Sassa may have entered into with CPS for the payment of grants from April 1 2017? b. If so, the content and nature of the objections must be set out; c. Do Sassa and/or the minister have any objection to independent monitoring of the steps taken or envisaged to run, again, a competitive bidding process to have a new contractor or contractors appointed for the payment of grants? d. If so, the content and nature of the objections must be set out. e. Do Sassa and/or the minister have any objection to independent monitoring of the steps to be taken to ensure that Sassa itself will become capable of administering and paying the grants in future? f. If so, the content and nature of the objections must be set out. g. If Sassa and/or the minister do not have objections to independent monitoring in relation to any or all of these processes, they are invited to propose practical measures as to how and by whom the independent monitoring may be done.