As we all know, the 17-million recipients of SA&rsquo;s social grants are now imperilled by frightening incompetence within the social welfare department. Interestingly, the issue is so extensive and wide-ranging it has spilt over into the fund-management industry and an argument is now raging over whether investment houses are acting consistently with their social responsibility mandates by investing in the company that distributes the grants, Net1 UEPS Technologies.One of SA&rsquo;s largest and most respected fund managers, Allan Gray, is mainly in the firing line here, since, by dint of history, it holds on behalf of its clients about 16% of the company. It has to be said that the accusations against Allan Gray are in some respects unfair. The company is a value investor and, on those grounds alone, it&rsquo;s hard to fault the investment. Net1 is trading at a very modest 7.5-times its annual earnings. Its revenue has almost doubled over the past five years and its profit margin is extremely healthy.But the question is about how this growth has been achieved? Is it sustainable, or is this a classic case of a company that is cutting ethical corners to achieve impressive returns?The contrary argument is made by Magda Wierzycka, the CEO of Sygnia, which is something of a competitor to Allan Gray, although you have to admire her moxie in raising this controversial issue. Her argument is essentially that Net1 distributes social grants on behalf of the state, but it also cross-sells grant recipients with a host of services including utilities such as airtime, insurance and microloans."Most asset managers forget that they are the custodians of the savings of many South Africans who would be appalled to know that they own shares in Net1 which, it appears, exploits the poorest strata of society to make a profit."In response, Allan Gray&rsquo;s chief operating officer, Rob Dower, points out that although it has been claimed that Net1 uses its database of grant recipients to illegally and/or improperly sell a range of additional services through networked companies, this was the specific subject of a consumer tribunal judgment in 2015 that cleared the company.&nbsp;This is true &ndash; up to a point. What Net1 does is that it advertises its services to recipients. If recipients want to take up any of the offers, they are, it appears, required to give up their social security agency cards and are supplied with alternative bank cards. The grant is then transferred to the Grindrod bank account and the money owing on the service is deducted before the recipient gets the cash.Dower acknowledges this is difficult ethical territory. "These products can cause harm but they also constitute financial inclusion, allowing people to access a risk safety net and basic credit at lower cost than from an informal lender."On balance, he says, "we don&rsquo;t think it should be a general policy of Allan Gray not to invest in providers of financial services to the poor".True enough, as far as it goes. The problem is that the effective interest rate on the loans is something in the region of 5.6% a month. Microlenders often argue extortionate rates like these are justified because of the higher risk involved in granting loans to the poor. That risk derives from uncertainty about the future income profile of the recipient.But in this case, that risk is massively mitigated by the fact that the income is the consequence of a government handout and is therefore as close as you can possibly get to being risk free. The risk profile should by rights be comparable to that of a government bond and the interest rate should reflect that.The real question is this: if short-term investment horizons undermine society, are they really worth it? And that is a question as much for fund managers&rsquo; clients as it is for fund-management companies themselves.