 Former Constitutional Court judges have thrown their weight behind a campaign to persuade the government not to withdraw from the International Criminal Court (ICC). The campaign was announced after SA formally withdrew its notice of withdrawal from the ICC on Tuesday evening. The Pretoria High Court last week ruled that the government's decision to withdraw from the ICC was "unconstitutional and invalid" as it had not taken the decision through a Parliamentary process. Retired justices Zak Jacoob, Yvonne Mokgoro, Laurie Ackermann, Richard Goldstone, Johann Kriegler and Kate O'Regan are signatories to a submission to Parliament by the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) to compel the government to remain party to the Rome Statute of the ICC. Jacoob on Wednesday said the submission by the ICJ, in collaboration with former judges as well as the former United Nations Commissioner on Human Rights Navi Pillay, showed that they were not "cynical" and continued to have faith in the democratic process. He said the aim of the submission was to remind Parliament of the reasons it was among the first countries to sign the Rome Statute and was among the founding members of the ICC. "SA made the choice, saying some human rights violations we so gross, so vile … that no leader … even if they are a state leader at that time … should be able to get away with it. That is a central moral issue that we a country have to come to terms with once again," Jacoob said. He acknowledged that the ICC was not perfect, but said SA along with the other 23 African countries who were part of it should move to reform it from the inside. The ICJ's submission to Parliament was handed over to Parliament's portfolio committee on justice and correctional services on Wednesday. It recommends that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court Act Repeal Bill should not be passed, that SA should remain a party to the Rome Statute and that it should engage with other African states to assist in bringing about reforms to the ICC. It also recommends that SA should encourage other African countries to put in place legislation required to empower domestic courts with the ability to try genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. Justice Minister Michael Masutha was due to appear in Parliament on Wednesday to discuss last week's High Court decision. Masutha said in February that the High Court ruling amounted to a delay that would not stop the government’s bid to leave the ICC. With Reuters and TMG Digital