With the Geneva Motor Show just around the corner, a number of manufacturers are showing the models they will reveal in the metal at the show. Land Rover will reveal its Velar there, but there will also be a number of new SUV models. One of these will be the new Volvo XC60. The company has released a number of teaser images for the vehicle, which looks set to adopt the company’s new design philosophy from the XC90 and S90. There will also be new technology, particularly in the realm of safety, with the company promising the XC60 will be able to steer itself around any potential accident. Mitsubishi has finally released pictures of its Eclipse, a model that is set to take on the new Toyota C-HR launching in SA this week. The design marks a radical departure for the brand. All looks good until you get to the rear with the Honda-style split window — we thought that had been left in the design history books. Peugeot will unveil its Instinct concept, a car that adopts the shooting brake design philosophy. It will also be the French marque’s showcase when it comes to autonomous driving. Alpine on the way Talking of the French, Renault’s commitment to resurrecting the Alpine brand will take another step forward with the reveal of the production version of the new A110. Adopting the name and styling cues from the original A110, it heralds a new sporting era for the brand and Renault has already confirmed the model is planned for our market. Rocket reboot Still with performance, Ford has unveiled the next generation of the popular pocket rocket, the Fiesta ST. It will get a new 1.5l EcoBoost engine delivering 147kW and a claimed 0-100km/h time of 6.7 seconds. On the testing scene, the BMW X2 has been spotted on roads around Outdshoorn, while further afield Land Rover is testing facelift versions of the Range Rover and Range Rover Sport. Both will get new front designs to give them a more sporty look while interiors could receive a number of updates. Jeep is putting the finishing touches to its new Wrangler, which is likely to be more of a design evolution to appease its fans. Expect some aerodynamic tweaks to make it slightly less upright and there are rumours of a hybrid powertrain option. Jaguar upstages Alfa In what must have been a planned coup by Jaguar, motoring media attending the international launch of the new Alfa Romeo Stelvio in Switzerland were treated to the view of a convoy of camouflaged Jaguar E-Pace models undergoing testing. Far from the usual Jaguar testing locations, it was a brilliant piece of public relations.