The Competition Tribunal’s deferral of a decision on the Competition Commission’s settlement with Citibank for its role in the bank foreign-exchange collusion scandal will not affect the commission’s ability to seek the maximum 10% fine on 16 other banking entities. "It will not affect our ability to get the 10%," said Makgale Mohlala, head of the commission’s cartels division. "This is a settlement, which is always lower than the penalty imposed upon prosecution." On Wednesday, the competition regulators and Citibank deadlocked on the percentage the commission levied on the bank’s annual turnover in determining the R69.5m fine Citibank has to pay to settle charges that it colluded with 17 entities to rig rand-dollar trade. Mohlala said Citibank claimed its financial information was confidential. Citi, the bank’s parent company, did not respond to requests for comment. The commission is seeking an order from the tribunal confirming the R69.5m settlement. It is not seeking a penalty on Absa, Barclays Capital and Barclays plc, which have applied for leniency. Business Day understands the tribunal needs more information on how the fine was calculated to assist in evaluating future fines or settlement agreements in the banking sector, ensuring they remain consistent. The tribunal said the percentage used in the calculation would not be made public. Citibank agreed to settle accusations that its trader, Christopher Cummins, had agreed with counterparts at other banks to rig trades in the market for rand and dollars. In January, Cummins pleaded guilty to conspiring to fix prices in the US department of justice’s long-running investigation into currency rigging. He agreed to co-operate with the justice department’s investigation, which is continuing. Meanwhile, Standard Bank and Investec, two of three local banking groups named in the complaint, have questioned the commission’s findings. Standard Bank CEO Sim Tshabalala said earlier in March that the bank needed more information from the regulator after an internal investigation turned up nothing. "We are still engaging with the Competition Commission," said Ross Linstrom, a spokesman for the bank. Investec spokeswoman Ursula Nobrega said the commission had told the bank it would provide further information on its allegations by March 31. "We await that information." The Competition Commission has until March 31 to supplement its complaint, according to the tribunal.