There are explosive players — some emerging‚ others who have fallen by the wayside — who have been overlooked for Bafana Bafana despite banging on the door to be included. The public have been clamouring for their inclusion‚ and not without good reason. SA’s under-23s drew with Brazil at last year’s Olympics and this year’s under-20s reached the semifinals of the Caf U20 Africa Cup of Nations before going down to hosts Zambia on Wednesday night. If ever there was a chance to inject youth and energy into Bafana, this must be it. Owen da Gama‚ who is set to take charge of the friendlies against Guinea Bissau and Angola on the Fifa international dates of March 25 and 28‚ will announce his squad on Thursday. The South African Football Association (Safa) is set to finally announce the new head coach in the coming days, and one can only hope the new man has an adventurous spirit. Times Media Digital believes the following are 10 players whom no Bafana coach should go to war without: Percy Tau There is no more destructive forward in SA today. He plays with an exuberance and explosiveness that reminds of the greats of the 1970s and 1980s. An African club champion. How has he not been picked yet? Lebogang Manyama He just seems to get better and better‚ and his attacking play has been the driving force behind Cape Town City’s remarkable rise to the top of the PSL. Phakamani Mahlambi Bidvest Wits’s 19-year-old attacking prodigy has attracted international interest‚ his pace is electrifying‚ and he’s ready to play for Bafana. Kamohelo Mokotjo In Holland they rave about his every touch‚ yet Gordon Igesund and Shakes Mashaba appeared to be scared off by his outspokenness and confidence. It’s time to see why this midfield dynamo is so highly rated in Europe‚ because his exclusion has become detrimental in the extreme. Kermit Erasmus One of SA’s best destructive forwards‚ and back where he belongs in Europe‚ even if he’s had to drop down a league on loan to Lens in Ligue 2‚ Erasmus can come back from the cold now Mashaba is gone. The scary part is‚ with some of the forwards who have emerged‚ he might not even be needed. Lebogang PhiriPhiri lights up the scene week in and week out for Brondby in Denmark‚ where he’s something of a folk hero‚ yet is deemed surplus by his national team. Abbubaker Mobara Mobara had a tough transition adapting to a new team at Orlando Pirates from Ajax Cape Town from the start of this season. His versatility means he gets used everywhere from centreback to right-back to defensive midfield‚ which can make it difficult for a player with immense potential to establish himself. He’s been superb in recent games in midfield. Thabo Mnyamane Underrated Mnyamane’s much-improved consistency since moving from Pretoria University to neighbours SuperSport United has made him a potent threat. He’s become a far more technically correct forward‚ dynamic in his mobility and capable of blasting in goals. Luther Singh The tournament top scorer so far for Amajita at the U20 Afcon is technically gifted‚ has pace and a finish. Perhaps the 18-year-old should not be rushed too much just yet‚ but he certainly seems worth a senior squad place for experience‚ and a run in some friendlies soon to assess his ability at that level. Thapelo Morena Since being converted to a right-back at Mamelodi Sundowns by Pitso Mosimane one of the fastest men in South African football has blossomed. His pace means he’s very hard to beat in defence‚ and a difficult to stop on the overlap. TMG Digital