President Jacob Zuma has asked to intervene as an "interested party" in Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan’s high court case involving the Gupta family and a number of banks. Zuma, via an affidavit from state attorney Kgosi Lekabe, tackled Standard Bank’s explosive response to Gordhan’s application, filed in December 2016, in which it appealed for protection against executive interference in the bank. Zuma argued that Standard Bank had sought relief that affected the president directly, but failed to join him into the legal proceedings as a party. The relief sought by Standard Bank — in addition to Gordhan’s application for a declaratory order — was for the court to declare that "no member of the national executive of the government, including the president and all members of the Cabinet, acting of their own accord", was empowered to "intervene in any manner whatsoever in any decision" by the banks to terminate banking relationships "with Oakbay Investments Propriety Limited and its associated entities". Zuma said this relief affected him directly, yet the bank had chosen not to include him or any other member of the Cabinet as party to the proceedings. "The president has pointed these facts out to the attorneys of Standard Bank in correspondence, but Standard Bank persists in its attitude that it does not intend taking any steps to join the president as a party … but nevertheless maintains a right to seek relief against the president in those proceedings," the affidavit reads. Zuma wants Standard Bank’s application for such relief to be struck from the roll and for the bank to pay his costs. Sahara Computers also took issue with Standard Bank’s submission in its supplementary affidavit in which it argues that Gordhan should be personally liable for costs in his application for a declaratory order. The Gupta-owned Sahara Computers argues in separate court papers that Gordhan should be held "personally liable" for costs in the matter as the litigation was "vexatious, scurrilous and meant to harass". Gordhan asked the court for a declaratory order in 2016 that would confirm that he did not have the authority to intervene in the relationship between the banks and their clients." It followed the closure of the Gupta family’s accounts by the country’s major banks — and intense pressure from the family and its allies on Gordhan and the banks to intervene to reverse that decision. The Cabinet went as far as setting up a task team to look into the closures. Gordhan was included in the task team but opted not to participate, on legal advice. Arguments in the matter will be heard on Tuesday. Gordhan’s attorney’s have opposed the submission of the supplementary affidavit. Sahara argues the banks seek to "create a situation where no action of any kind can be taken against them on the grounds that it could be tantamount to interference". Sahara said Standard Bank "gives the game away" when it said it had no objection to a judicial inquiry into the banks — mooted by the leader of the Cabinet task team, Mineral Resources Minister Mosebenzi Zwane, who is seen as close to the Guptas. But according to Sahara the bank says Zuma has to take the outcome of the application into account in determining this inquiry’s terms of reference. "This also explains the minister’s real purpose in bringing this application — to curtail the options available to the president, and fettering his discretion, because the minister thinks the president should not have them," the company said in the supplementary affidavit. It argues Gordhan is pursuing the application to "gain a political advantage in his political dispute with his Cabinet colleagues" and says the declaratory order will allow him to "obfuscate the principle of the separation of powers".