The world appears to be in more than its usual disorder. Religion is dividing societies and nations and, where religion is not doing it, poverty and inequality are. Ask Islamic State and Thomas Piketty. Homeless millions are migrating. The globe is overpopulated as well as overheated. Plastic is choking our oceans, antibiotics barely work anymore and robots are about to steal our jobs. With Donald Trump as president, the US is thought by liberals to be doomed. With Brexit scheduled, Britain is thought by liberals to be doomed. The EU is thought to be doomed by conservatives. With North Korea’s Kim Jong-un defiantly building his nuclear arsenal, people fear the world is doomed. Here in SA, with President Jacob Zuma’s ANC intent on ruling until Jesus comes, the opposition is satisfied the country is doomed already. The menace behind these events is that something fundamental is doomed, not just the politicians and governments of the day. Democracy was supposed to get things right when the Soviet Union collapsed and that has not happened. The word nowadays is democracy has failed. The people are up in arms. Democracy itself is doomed. If only by way of relief, we should ask ourselves if that is true. If it is true, where is SA — where are all of us — in this? Where are we heading? At the end of the 1980s, as the Soviet empire dissolved, Francis Fukuyama published The End of History. The thesis is that if there is such a thing as progress, society must be progressing somewhere, to a final stage of political and economic organisation. Following the thinking of the German philosopher Friedrich Hegel, Fukuyama argued that the final stage was liberal democracy. Let us deal with the obvious objection. The book is not just another instance of Eurocentrism, although that charge has been brought against it. The larger questions of whether there is a direction in history and where that might be leading are there, whether you consider the future of Asia, Africa or Europe, especially in a world where ideas cross frontiers as fast as thought. All the alternatives to liberal democracy are on offer today: monarchy, autocracy, theocracy, imperialism. To the communist, the end is still the proletarian paradise; to the fascist, world dominion. If liberal democracy is not the predetermined end of history, which of these is? And if none is, where does that leave us? China, India, maybe Brazil, are seen as the coming powers of the 21st century. Assuming India is, as billed, the world’s biggest democracy, is the option the Chinese model? What is that model anyway? Soviet Russia, its originator, is no more; post-communist Russia is looking more and more a second-class power. However cautiously it may have moved, China is slowly leaving behind the original dream of its founders. These questions are insistent because SA cannot avoid them in our globalised world. Apartheid SA tried to cut itself off and failed because of the impossibility of isolation. On a smaller scale and more grotesquely, Robert Mugabe’s Zimbabwe attempted the same thing and has gone the same way. You cannot get off the modern world. Perhaps it is not history but our thinking that has temporarily come to an end. Even if democracy should turn out to be the final organisation of the world’s affairs, it will not make a perfect world. Democracy is not a destination nor a panacea. It must be seen as a culture, a permanent work in progress whose values and institutions can be appreciated only when set against other forms and philosophies of government. You only see its worth by comparison. If SA’s democracy falls far short at the moment, there is only one solution. "The cure for the evils of democracy," wrote American journalist and scholar HL Mencken, "is more democracy." Is that right? And will it be proved right again? • Whelan, a graduate of the London School of Economics, is a freelance journalist.