Mexico City — Mexicans laboured amid ruins on Wednesday to revive their capital the day after an earthquake left hundreds dead, reduced buildings to rubble and brought one of the world’s largest cities to a halt. Many offices were set to remain shut Wednesday, but banks and markets resumed normal operations. Power started to return after 40% of Mexico City was blacked out in the aftermath of the quake, President Enrique Pena Nieto said. The quake destroyed dozens of buildings, including a school, and killed at least 225 people, with an unknown number still missing. Thousands of residents in the hardest-hit areas of Mexico City spent the night at hotels or on the couches of friends or family, and it was unclear when their homes — if they still stood — could be safe to live in again.  When the earthquake hit, it sent panicked people in Mexico City running into the street. The dust settled minutes later to reveal a landscape of flattened buildings and rubble in the heart of the city. "Awful. I think it was one of the strongest we’ve felt. I don’t know what magnitude, but it was awful," said Pedro Cruz Martinez, a public servant cradling his little girl, after joining the rush of fearful parents to a local school. After the screams and the shock, people quickly set to work digging for survivors. In a scene reproduced in streets across the city centre, dozens of people scrabbled with bare hands to remove rubble from atop a concertinaed building as they waited for specialized machinery to arrive. Central areas like Roma, Condesa and Doctores appeared to have taken the brunt of the 7.1-magnitude quake. Several buildings were completely flattened in Roma, popular for its bars and restaurants and one of the neighbourhoods hit hardest by the 1985 earthquake that shattered large swathes of this city and killed at least 10,000 — 32 years ago to the day. Amid the tears and terror, there were small victories. Cheers and applause echoed around the crowded Calle Alvaro Obregon in Roma as rescuers managed to pull someone from under the rubble. There remained a sense that such moments would be rare, however. In other buildings in the same area, volunteers joined the authorities to remove debris. One of them held a sign with the word "silence" in order to be able to hear people who may still be alive. Local media reported around 30 collapsed buildings in Mexico City with at least four confirmed deaths in the capital, as the overall toll including surrounding areas reached 138, amid fears it could rise further. Authorities asked for help from volunteers and for water. Some police officers came through the crowd carrying containers of water. Medics set up makeshift field hospitals in the streets, treating people for broken limbs and crush injuries. Many people lay on stretchers, medics holding strips of cardboard boxes over victims’ heads to protect them from the sun. Police called for calm and cordoned off streets with grotesquely twisted buildings, their reinforcing steel poking out from concrete. People hugged and comforted each other amid anxiety about loved ones. Many stood around in a daze, not sure where to go or what to do. But everyone was staying in the streets, afraid to go home. Reuters and AFP