Joburg mayor Herman Mashaba breathed a sigh of relief on Thursday after his institutional review plans were given the go-ahead by the metro. Also passed was its 2018-19 Integrated Development Plan, a key requirement in the Municipal Finances Management Act and a vital cog in the budgeting process. The plan sets out the municipality’s goals and development plans and aligns them with the available resources. Three metro council meetings had collapsed following a decision by the EFF to boycott council meetings to protest against the DA’s “treatment of small parties in the coalition”. Among other things, the review plan aims to reduce the section 56 managers in the city from the current 38 to 12. They report to the city manager. The council plans to re-integrate the city’s entities into the city itself. The mayor’s institutional review was tabled on Thursday in council, which functioned for the first time since August. Mashaba told the council that the current span of control by the city manager is impossible, as “no city manager can deal with so many direct reports in a city as big as Johannesburg”. Mashaba’s chief of staff Michael Beaumont told Business Day that the senior executive positions, which currently report to the city manager, will become a new layer of 12 section 56 positions, whose appointments are finalised by council; the rest will no longer be council appointments. Even though the EFF helped with tabling the report in the council and voted for it with a show of hands, the coalition-led government did not get a free pass from EFF members, who attended the last day of a two-day council meeting on Thursday. EFF caucus leader Musa Novela voiced his unhappiness that it took the city almost a month to communicate to Gauteng MEC for co-operative governance and traditional affairs, Paul Mashatile, that the metro was late in tabling its plans for consultation on the Integrated Development Plan. This was passed on Thursday. The past three council meetings, of which the first was a special council meeting, and the third was day one of the two-day September council meeting, had to be adjourned when the EFF did not attend. This led to the ANC walking out, which led to the council not being quorate. Beaumont said the changes planned in the institutional review involved the appointment of an independent service provider who would guide the city on how best to implement it. Mashaba told council that no jobs would be lost in the process, except those of board members at the city’s entities. The current boards have an interim mandate to lead the entities in the re-integration. As part of the review, the city plans to integrate the city’s entities into the city itself. It also plans to regionalise some of the service delivery entities, Beaumont said. Mashaba told council that the city has grown unresponsive to the needs of residents, due to the cycle of service delivery, which must take place much closer to residents. mailovichc@businesslive.co.za 