London — Oil prices steadied on Thursday, holding most of their recent gains before a meeting of oil producers. It is thought that producers could extend production limits aimed at clearing a glut that has depressed the market for more than three years. Ministers from oil cartel Opec, Russia and other producers meet in Vienna on Friday and are due to consider extending output cuts that began in January. Opec and its allies have agreed to reduce output by about 1.8-million barrels per day until March 2018 in an attempt to empty inventories. Many analysts now expect them to extend the deal, possibly to the end of 2018. "An extension of the agreement or an increase in the cuts may be announced," said Jeffrey Halley of futures brokerage Oanda. Brent crude oil was down five US cents at $56.24 a barrel by 8.20am GMT. US light crude was 15c lower at $50.54. Both contracts have risen more than 15% over the last three months as global oil supply has tightened. Opec’s efforts have been hampered by higher production in some other parts of the world, including the US, where shale oil production is reaching record highs. Recent hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico have also pushed up crude inventories in some parts of the US as refineries there have been shut by flooding. US commercial crude oil stocks rose for a third straight week, lifting 4.6-million barrels in the week ending September 15 to 472.83-million barrels. US oil production has reached 9.51-million barrels per day, up from 8.78-million barrels per day directly after Hurricane Harvey hit the US Gulf Coast. US crude received some support from a strong draw in petrol stocks by 2.1-million barrels to 216.19-million barrels, traders said. The structure of oil futures prices suggests Opec production cuts are beginning to have an effect, analysts say. Front-month Brent futures have risen sharply in recent months, much more than forward prices. This has changed the Brent price curve, moving it into what traders call "backwardation", when prices for immediate delivery are higher than prices for later barrels. The shift is seen as an indicator of a tightening market as it encourages the immediate sale of oil rather than holding it in storage. Reuters