UK PR firm Bell Pottinger’s role in the construction of the Gupta family’s propaganda empire was part of a multinational fake news scheme to hide the family’s growing enrichment at the expense of South African citizens and taxpayers. The Times, with the African Network of Centres for Investigative Reporting (ANCIR), for the first time reveals the size and scope of a campaign that outpaces the apartheid-era Information Scandal in cost and political impact. Bell Pottinger is facing a severe backlash as a result of its role. On Monday, the Public Relations and Communication Association in the UK is due to meet to consider the company’s appeal against an adverse finding which the association has made against it. The final decision is due on Tuesday and Bell Pottinger’s future could hang on its outcome. This investigation reveals a multi-channel media empire that includes mainstream news outlets The New Age and ANN7, alternative news websites, and a vast number of contributors to social media including Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. It is the first large-scale fake news propaganda war in SA, and it has adversely affected the country’s politics and economy. This network of fake news produced at least 220,000 tweets and hundreds of Facebook posts to confuse the public between July 2016 and July 2017, when this report’s remit stopped. Since then the pace has picked up. The largest period of sustained activity was spent attacking former finance minister Pravin Gordhan in the second half of 2016 to create a climate conducive to forcing his removal as finance minister. Now the network has entered a new phase of heightened activity and has sharpened its attacks on Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa and his race for the ANC presidency. Over the weekend, Ramaphosa was forced to defend himself in the face of private e-mails which had been apparently hacked and leaked to the Sunday Independent and which claimed he has had a string of extramarital affairs. The distribution of the latest accusations against Ramapahosa this weekend followed a similar pattern to other propaganda conclusively linked to the fake news network. The fake news network has started a separate and well-funded campaign to respond to the tranche of #GuptaEmails in the form of #WMCLeaks, which features websites as well as social feeds that spew out a daily range of propaganda. Analysts say it would require a full-time army of IT technologists, writers, editors and graphic artists to produce a volume of material like this. The ANCIR reports will take you into the dark heart of a propaganda assault which is shaping the South African story. This weekend, Bell Pottinger CEO and major shareholder James Henderson resigned. In July, he had issued an "unequivocal" apology for the campaign. • The African Network of Centres for Investigative Reporting (ANCIR) is an association of the continent’s best investigative newsrooms. It works to strengthen investigative journalism and is incubated by Code for Africa.