Opposition parties are making another attempt this week to have President Jacob Zuma removed from office while he is at the Brics summit in China. The Constitutional Court will hear on Tuesday the application by the EFF, the United Democratic Movement (UDM) and the Congress of the People to force Zuma’s impeachment. The parties want the court to rule that National Assembly Speaker Baleka Mbete must order action to be taken against the president. The DA has applied to intervene in the application, in which the three parties argue that the same court’s judgment on Nkandla provided prima facie grounds for impeachment, requiring further investigation. The opposition parties have taken on the National Assembly for failing to institute an investigation into the conduct of the president after the Nkandla judgment in March 2016. They want the court to declare that Parliament did not put processes in place to hold Zuma to account. The DA argues in its application that Parliament failed in its constitutional obligation by not having effective mechanisms and processes in place for impeachment investigations and hearings as part of its rules. The court case comes a month after opposition parties failed to have Zuma removed in a vote of no confidence in Parliament. It is the eighth vote of no confidence Zuma has survived. An unprecedented number of ANC MPs voted against him. The motion of no confidence, allowed for in section 102 of the Constitution, is separate from a possible impeachment process, which is governed by section 89 of  the Constitution. The National Assembly will also debate on Tuesday a proposal for an early election. The DA made the call for the dissolution of Parliament and early elections after the no-confidence vote. The DA made the request for early elections in terms of section 50 (1) of the Constitution. The section allows for the dissolution of Parliament and stipulates that the president must dissolve the National Assembly if the assembly adopts a resolution to dissolve with a supporting vote of a majority of its members. This call has been rejected, not only by the ANC, but by other opposition parties as well. Parliament’s portfolio committee on police will be briefed on Tuesday by a panel of experts and the South African Police Service transformation task team on recommendations in the Marikana Commission of Inquiry report. The fight between the UDM and the DA over the removal of Nelson Mandela Bay deputy mayor Mongameli Bobani is likely to continue this week. The UDM has filed a notice of motion in the High Court in Port Elizabeth to interdict Bobani’s removal, as well as to ask for the decision to be set aside. Respondents have until Friday to file papers. quintalg@businesslive.co.za