Oil prices fell on Monday and are expected to remain depressed this week amid signs that US oil producers are beginning to recover from tropical storm Harvey faster than expected. While South African motorists brace for a 67c rise in petrol prices, due to rand weakness, worries about oil prices spiking in the aftermath of Harvey appear to be easing. US petroleum futures were off for a second session on Monday from the biggest monthly gain since March 2016 as some of the suspended refineries in storm-affected areas were preparing to resume operations, said SP Angel analysts. Harvey’s landfall in the US affected areas that contained half of the US’s refinery capacity, with Brent crude prices creeping up last week due to paralysed refinery capacity, and data releases indicating that inventories in the US had fallen in previous months, analysts said. The Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries wants to reduce global supply to drive up prices, but the figures on how effective this has been have been mixed. Exxon Mobil said at the weekend it was restarting its Houston area Baytown refinery — the second-largest US oil refinery — on Monday, saying its initial assessment was that only minor repairs were needed. Colonial Pipeline said that it expected on Tuesday to restart a pipeline that pumped petrol to the US east coast from Texas refineries. This eased traders’ concern that too much crude was flowing into storage, reports Dow Jones news wires. Despite the human and financial cost of the storm, there was no reason to believe it would have a longer-term effect on US economic growth, which had been rising at about 2% a year, said Old Mutual Multi-Managers strategists Dave Mohr and Izak Odendaal. The price of petrol is being closely watched domestically as the Reserve Bank considers further interest rate cuts to boost growth. Last month‚ the petrol price went up 19c/l. The department attributed the latest price hike to the rand weakening on average against the dollar in the period under review, rising global prices of petroleum products and an annual increase in wages of forecourt staff. Brent crude was off 0.25% to $52.25 a barrel in late-night trade on Monday. The rand hovered just under R13/$, with analysts expecting volatility until the end of 2017. gernetzkyk@businesslive.co.za