Facing allegations of extramarital affairs he says are a smear campaign to prevent him taking over the ANC leadership, Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa sat calmly next to his wife as an auctioneer sold more than $1m of his rare Ugandan cattle, buffaloes and antelope. While he fended off the accusations, which broke on social media on Friday and in the Sunday Independent newspaper two days later, that he had affairs with at least eight women, his adversaries are likely to keep up attacks on him in the run-up to the ANC’s leadership elections in December. His wealth may open him up to more criticism. Ramaphosa, 64, is one of the richest black South Africans and is married to the sister of the country’s only black dollar billionaire, Patrice Motsepe. Opponents previously targeted him for his fortune and an interest in the wildlife industry after he made a R19.5m bid for a buffalo in 2012. Ramaphosa’s shareholding in mines owned by Lonmin and ownership of a local McDonald’s franchise were used against him during protests after police killed 34 miners near Lonmin’s Marikana mine five years ago. "We have seen that being used against him by some, in that there is a sense of distrust of somebody who is wealthy, and that goes to the core of the historical context of South African politics," said Roland Henwood, a politics lecturer at the University of Pretoria. "People who are starting to target him for being wealthy are essentially targeting the policies of government that have created the kind of wealth that he has." During the auction on Saturday at Zebula Golf Estate near the town of Bela Bela, two hours’ drive north of Johannesburg, at least five helicopters and nine small planes were parked on the runway. Ramaphosa’s six-member auction consortium, Stud Game Breeders, sold livestock ranging from Ramaphosa’s Ankole cattle to buffaloes and a rhino, for almost R116m in total at a live auction. Ramaphosa sold animals worth R15m from his nearby Phala Phala game farm and a cattle operation. He has labelled the weekend claims about his private life part of a "dirty war" ahead of the vote. He admitted to an affair eight years ago in an interview with the Sunday Times, but denied other extramarital relations. In the ANC campaign, his main rival, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, is calling for "radical economic transformation" aimed at transferring more wealth to the black majority, an objective that has been used to justify policies such as new black ownership rules in the third Mining Charter, which business groups have said will freeze investment and cause job losses. Ramaphosa has argued for inclusive growth. In an interview after the auction, Ramaphosa said he was in touch with poor people. Game farming "really can be a great empowerment opportunity for black people", he said. "This is a wonderful opportunity for our people," he said, as it uses land that is unsuitable for farming. Of the six members of his auction consortium, the other five are white men. The group includes Norman Adami, the former chairman of SABMiller’s local unit. Adami sold livestock including buffaloes for R48.6m on the day. During that sale, Ramaphosa sat next to his wife Tshepo for almost five hours, making notes in the auction catalogue and eating lunch from a plastic container, while occasionally stepping out of the 1,400-seat tent to talk on his cellphone. After the last bid he posed for pictures and held babies, stood still for an occasional selfie, shook hands and made informal conversation with bidders and spectators who addressed him simply as Cyril. The prices "could have been better", said Ramaphosa, who also bought sable antelope for himself during the sale. Bloomberg