I spent five minutes of a flight reading Hillary Rodham Clinton’s new book and the other nine hours and 55 minutes thinking about where it would be most useful. Toilet paper in migrant camps? It is the only book I have encountered in which a question and an answer both appear on the cover in just five words. Around this time in 2016, I was invited to assist a member of a panel in a debate hosted by The Spectator magazine. Our side, arguing for the motion that Donald Trump would be the next president of the US, lost to the side arguing for Hillary Clinton, by about 200 votes. We didn’t articulate the inevitability of what was to happen in November 2016 because to do so honestly and convincingly, we would have had to emphasise Clinton’s behaviour, and that of her family’s, in the context of the wider political establishment. The Spectator is conservative but David Cameron’s chumocracy had perverted critical parts of this idea, so to declare that the US election would feature the same repulsion of the establishment evident in the UK’s decision to leave the EU was to incite accusations of blunt populism based on a single example. Despite Conrad Black wiping the floor with the opposition, we lost. Clinton has reduced herself to one of Jacob Zuma’s strategically appointed cabinet ministers or public enterprises officials. The authenticity of her surprise at losing is terrifying but illuminating; in her words, you can see Faith Muthambi’s battle with good ethics, Bathabile Dlamini’s incompetence, Ben Ngubane’s denials and the ghost of Nkozasana Dlamini-Zuma refusing to accept accountability for her role in Sarafina 2. To truly understand this, you need to be horrified by it. The link between Clinton and the worst of the South African government is clear. While some harbour more criminal intent than others, they are all essentially victims of their own entitlement, whose response to their own mistakes or insincerity was to cover their tracks, then lie, and repeat, until this act became their existence and they discovered themselves in some synthetic universe where only self-determined rules apply. This book was written for a particular kind of detached thought; for those who reside in a kind of Emmy Awards bubble, for readers of The Guardian and the dreadful Independent, for those outraged by the mere suggestion that Sweden’s horrific rape statistics might have something to do with its immigration policy, for Twitter’s relentless supply of social justice warriors. Grinding through this book has been painful as it represents the shape of excuses to come. When the worst of the ANC is dismantled, I envisage similar sets of encounters, and while partisan television channels and trashy websites run by scoundrels will no doubt replace books, the theme of suffering under something not of one’s own making will again present itself as a furious demand for sympathy. But the end of the age of the professional politician nears. The framing of liberal Dutch or French election victories as resistance to populism was misleading. All this served to do was distract from the stripping of the Brazilian government’s corporate sponsors — next to SA, perhaps the most obvious example of impunity and growing intolerance of it. It’s unlikely that Jacob Zuma would read this book, but I imagine he would be struck with senses of similarity and repetition. He could probably sue Clinton for plagiarism — even before he has plotted his memoirs. • Reader works for an energy investment and political advisory firm.