Outspoken ANC MP Makhosi Khoza dumped the ANC on Thursday, saying she will not be led by leaders who “lost legitimacy and credibility”. While Khoza was announcing her decision, the ANC’s presidential hopeful, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, was being sworn in as an MP behind closed doors together with Matthew Wolmarans, the former Rustenburg mayor and key ally of North West Premier Supra Mahumapelo. Wolmarans was convicted of ordering a hit on councillor Moss Phakoe and served 20 months in jail before the conviction was set aside. Dlamini-Zuma’s move to Parliament has sparked rumours of another reshuffle of the national executive to accommodate her in President Jacob Zuma’s Cabinet. But, it was Khoza’s resignation from the ANC that hogged the headlines on Thursday. Khoza told Business Day she did not believe she would be the last ANC MP to walk away as the party’s public image continued to suffer from perceived state capture and poor governance. “There is one thing we must appreciate, some members of the ANC are as conflicted as I was. I have reached the point where I believe the ANC will not self-correct. It would be unfair to think the other members will reach that point at the same time as me,” said Khoza. She insisted she would not join another party in the immediate future. “I don’t want to be lured by a leader that is not courageous. I don’t want to be led by people who are not principled. “Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma was one of the women I looked up to in the ANC. Even my academic achievements were inspired by her. I was disappointed when she allowed herself to be used by people who lack credibility,” she said. ANC spokesman Zizi Kodwa said the ANC was not surprised by Khoza’s resignation. “We have in the past discovered that she harbours uncontrollable ambitions of being a minister,” he told television broadcaster eNCA. “Unfortunately, these are the things that are very dangerous to the ANC — when individuals do everything in the ANC to promote themselves,” said Kodwa. He added that the party had discovered that Khoza’s “handlers wanted her to destroy the ANC from within, so we are not surprised”. 