Kenya’s supreme court on Friday annulled the country’s recent presidential election and called for a new poll to be held within 60 days. In a surprise ruling that plunged one of Africa’s top economies into a new period of uncertainty the bench ruled in favor of the petition filed by opposition candidate Raila Odinga, who claimed the electoral commission’s IT system had been hacked to manipulate the results. Kenya’s election commission had declared incumbent President Uhuru Kenyatta the winner of the poll, which was held peacefully and lauded by international observers. Kevin Daly, a portfolio manager at Aberdeen Standard Investments, told the Journal that the decision could raise tensions in Kenya: “The ruling in Kenya is definitely a victory for the independence of the judiciary but it does strike a match pretty close to the tinderbox,” he noted. Daly, who focuses on fixed-income, said Eurobond market reaction to the news had been muted. “There is still a shortage of sub-Saharan African bonds and demand remains strong, so investors who hold them are taking a wait and see attitude,” Daly added. Zambia’s power utility agreed to restore full power supplies to Glencore’s unit in the country, ending a nearly two-week standoff over an electricity tariff hike. Zambia’s presidency said mining operations can resume as negotiations continue for a final agreement, expected in 6 weeks. South Sudan’s oil production will likely slump by 15% during the current fiscal year, as the civil war in the world’s youngest nation enters its 5th year, Bariyo writes. The finance ministry expects oil production, which has already collapsed to half of pre-conflict levels, to slump to 110,000 barrels-a-day in the fiscal year ending July 2018, casting further doubt on the country’s ability to recover from the devastating conflict. Adding to South Sudan’s pain, heavy rains have flooded its main trade route from Uganda, choking supplies to the country. Tajikistan is holding a fixed-income investors roadshow in London, aiming to tap international bond markets with a $500 million-to-$1 billion issue next week, Emese Bartha reports. Book-runners for the planned issuance are Citi and Raiffeisen. The issuance would come hot in the heels of S&P Global Ratings’ late-August decision to assign ‘B-’ long-term rating with stable outlook to Tajikistan. The country’s growth prospects are gradually improving, even though its economic base remains narrow, with a high dependency on remittances from Russia and with per-capita GDP being among the lowest of all the sovereigns S&P rates. Argentine industrial production rose 5.9% in July from a year ago as the country’s economy continued to rebound and government-funded construction projects boosted demand for metal and other materials, Taos Turner reports. The gain comes after an even stronger 6.6% jump in June. Argentina’s stock market continued to press higher, ending the week at another record having gained 50% so far this year. But while industrial output is rising and the economy is growing, many people complain that this feels like a jobless recovery, and it is unclear how much the positive economic data will help President Mauricio Macri’s ruling coalition in this October’s mid-term election. Cantor Fitzgerald stopped trading Venezuelan debt on Tuesday, days after the US Treasury Department slapped financial sanctions on the country for undermining democracy, Anatoly Kurmanaev and Matt Wirz report. The move is the first blanket restriction on Venezuelan bonds by a large US financial institution. Cantor, one of the largest intermediaries for Wall Street traders, as well as its affiliates GFI Group and BGC Partners have pulled all bonds issued by the Republic of Venezuela and state-oil company PdVSA, from auctions and told customers those trades are restricted. On Wednesday, the Depository Trust & Clearing Corp., one of the largest securities clearinghouses in the US, said it would no longer settle Venezuela bond trades, the latest blow for investors in the South American nation, Julie Wernau writes.