Nairobi — Kenya’s opposition leader Raila Odinga on Friday hailed as historic a court decision nullifying an election won by President Uhuru Kenyatta and calling for a re-run within 60 days "This is a historic day for the people of Kenya and by extension for the people of the continent of Africa," said Odinga, adding it was the first time a presidential result had been overturned in Africa. Chief Justice David Maraga said: "The presidential election held on August 8 was not conducted in accordance with the constitution." Maraga said this was a majority decision, with two judges dissenting. The shock ruling was a rare example of a poll result being overturned, with Maraga saying the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission (IEBC) "failed, neglected or refused to conduct the presidential election in a manner consistent with the dictates of the constitution". He validated Odinga’s argument that there had been "irregularities and illegalities", notably in the transmission of election results. Maraga said this had compromised the "integrity of the entire presidential election". "Those commissioners must go. Most of them belong in jail," Odinga said. East Africa’s biggest economy has a history of disputed elections. A row over the 2007 poll, which Odinga challenged after being declared the loser, was followed by weeks of ethnic bloodshed in which more than 1,200 were killed. International observers had said they saw no sign of manipulation of voting and tallying at polling stations during the August elections. Several observers said the opposition did not conduct a parallel tally and had not challenged results with complete data of their own. Many voters in the west of Kenya, Odinga’s stronghold, and along the coast, where there is traditionally large support for the opposition, feel neglected by the central government and shut out of power. A lawyer for Kenyatta, Ahmednasir Abdullahi, said the decision was "very political" and the election board had "done nothing wrong". But he said the decision had to be respected. Odinga has contested the last three elections and lost each time. After each one, he has claimed the votes were marred by rigging. In 2013, the Supreme Court dismissed his petition. This time, his team focused on proving that the process for tallying and transmitting results was flawed, rather than proving how much of the vote was rigged. Residents in the western city of Kisumu, where Odinga has strong backing, celebrated in the streets. Motorcycle drivers hooted their horns. "Today is a special today and I will celebrate until I am worn out," said Kevin Ouma. Kenya’s dollar bonds fell after the ruling. AFP, Bloomberg