Monza — Lewis Hamilton won the Italian Grand Prix for Mercedes on Sunday with an utterly dominant drive that sent the Briton to the top of the Formula One log for the first time in a year. The triple champion, who started the last race of the European season from a record 69th career pole position, led Finnish teammate Valtteri Bottas to a runaway one-two finish at Ferrari’s home track. "I love it here in Italy and I love the passion of the fans," Hamilton said on the podium in front of a sea of red-shirted Ferrari fans, with plenty of boos mixed in with the cheers. "The team did an exceptional job this weekend," he added. "Mercedes power is definitely better than Ferrari power." Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel, who had led the standings since he won the Australian season-opener in March, finished third, 36.3sec behind the winner. "It was a difficult day, a difficult start," said Vettel. "My race was fairly isolated. We tried to keep as close as possible but we simply didn’t have the pace. "You could say it’s a bad day but I know the team is on the right way … so I am in a positive mood despite the numbers." Hamilton is now three points clear of the German, with seven races remaining. Mercedes are 62 points clear of Ferrari in the constructors’ standings. The first driver to win two races in a row this season, with Monza following on from Belgium a week earlier, Hamilton now leads Vettel 6-4 on victories in 2017. He has 238 points to Vettel’s 235. The last time Hamilton led the standings on his own was at Monza a year ago. Now retired teammate Nico Rosberg went on to be crowned champion. Hamilton and four-time champion Vettel were level on points in the 2017 season after China in April, with one win and one second place each. If Sunday’s race was a dull affair, there was at least plenty of sunshine, in marked contrast to the steady rain that drenched fans and delayed qualifying for hours on Saturday. Hamilton pulled away cleanly from his historic pole, the fourth in a row at Monza, and was never challenged as he drove to the chequered flag with the minimum of fuss. It was his third Italian Grand Prix win in four years and 59th career victory — only Michael Schumacher, whose pole record he has beaten, can boast more — and few triumphs have been more straightforward. Force India’s French rookie Esteban Ocon, chasing his first podium finish, grabbed second place off the line from 18-year-old Canadian Lance Stroll in a Williams but then faded and finished sixth. Ferrari’s Kimi Raikkonen moved up to fourth initially, to cheers from the crowd, while compatriot Bottas fell to fifth but swiftly regained the place. Red Bull’s Max Verstappen clashed with Brazilian Felipe Massa’s Williams in an incident that forced the Dutch teenager to pit with a puncture. Vettel had started sixth but began to move up through the field, cheered by the throng of "tifosi" on the 70th anniversary of founder Enzo Ferrari’s first car, before settling into the loneliness of third place. Hamilton was relentless, pulling away from the home favourite at a rate of almost a second a lap and lapping half the field. Bottas finished 4.4sec adrift of Hamilton. Australian Daniel Ricciardo took fourth place for Red Bull, with Raikkonen fifth. Stroll ended up seventh, one place ahead of Massa, with Mexican Sergio Perez ninth for Force India. Reuters