When Ton Vosloo tapped Koos Bekker to take over as CEO of Naspers in 1996, Bekker said he would take no salary, no benefits and had a contract that would allow him to be dismissed without a golden handshake if he did not deliver. But he wanted to be paid in shares. Vosloo generously gave Bekker a big bundle of shares. Exactly how many is not known for the first five-year contract, because it was not then a JSE requirement to divulge it. But in his second five-year contract, he received 11.6-million shares, about 3% of the company. If he had sold this second lot as they were released, Bekker would have profited by as much as R1bn a year. At today’s value, that 3% would be worth more than R30bn, and he had three five-year contracts as CEO before he became chairman, each position coming with a bundle of shares. In a country in which executives of some major companies are remunerated disproportionately, Bekker is in a league of his own. When he chose his successor, he needed to show some generosity. Bob van Dijk earned R63m this year – nothing like what Bekker earned, but still breathtakingly high. And at the company’s recent annual general meeting, shareholders were questioning it. The logic of Bekker’s pay deal was, of course, that he was prepared to bet on the company and share the risk – getting nothing if he did not deliver as CEO. He could do this because he had made a personal fortune on the MTN launch. Things looked bleak when the dotcom bubble burst in 2001 and the Naspers share dropped from just more than R100 to R12 – well below its listing price of R19 seven years earlier. Bekker would have been out of pocket for his first five years of service had he taken up and sold his shares then. In fact, he was lucky to keep his job. But nobody could have predicted he would take Naspers from that low point to where it is today, topping R3,000 a share in August. That’s a 250-fold growth and a 50% growth in the share price in the past year alone. The reason for this extraordinary boom has something to do with good management and a fair amount to do with Bekker’s willingness to take calculated risks. But most of all it is the result of astounding good fortune. After the 2001 crash, Naspers decided to pull out of most of its Chinese and other international interests. It wrote off many hundreds of millions in investment. As it was leaving Beijing, Bekker was approached by two young men who had started an internet operation called Tencent, which was signing up users at a remarkable pace. Against the decision to withdraw, Bekker took a gamble on 49% of their company for R266m. Tencent today is worth $390bn (more than R5-trillion) and growing fast. Naspers has diluted to 33% of the company, but Tencent is still the major factor in the extraordinary growth of Naspers and how well it has done for its shareholders, especially Bekker. Which is why shareholders are upset. They can’t complain that they haven’t made pots of money, more than they would have on any comparable investment over this period of time. But their shares still appear undervalued. Their investment alone in Tencent is worth substantially more than Naspers’s market capitalisation of R1.3-trillion. This means the Tencent share is undervalued and the market is ascribing negative value to its many other, very substantial assets — such as Media24, the giant of SA’s print media industry, the huge cash-producing Multichoice/DStv, Mail.RU in Russia, eMAG and dozens of others in 120 countries. This makes Naspers a natural target for an asset-stripping break-up, which could release huge value. Just releasing the Tencent shares to Naspers shareholders would get them an additional $31bn and that is before ascribing value to the other assets. Shareholders are restless. Why should Van Dijk earn so much when all the value comes from Tencent, an investment that he does not even run, they argue. Why should he do so well when he is failing to get the value out of the other assets where he has greater control? If you strip out Tencent, then the balance of assets had a trading loss of more than $200m. Van Dijk is the easy target for shareholders who are looking to realise what they see as the hidden value in the company. It is not that they are unhappy with his performance, but some are seeing a potential for more quick profits. Greedy, you might say, considering they have done so well from the company already. It is also unrealistic, as Bekker has an iron grip on the company through an N-share structure, an anachronistic holdover from the days when such control mechanisms were allowed by the JSE. The company’s N-shares have 1,000 votes each, as against one vote for ordinary shares. So, the majority may have voted in August against the remuneration policy, but the policy will stand. Since apartheid — when Naspers was very much part of the Afrikaner nationalist project, National Party cabinet ministers sat on its board and its political editors attended party executive meetings — these shares were held by Sanlam, to keep them in the political family. Seeing the value, another giant Afrikaner company, PSG, in 2008 quietly offered Sanlam a huge premium for the small number of controlling shares. Bekker and his close friend and long-term colleague Cobus Stofberg took fright at the prospect of a silent takeover, sold a bunch of their ordinary shares and bid even higher to take control. These shares hold 68% of the votes and how they are held is a dark secret. Bekker argued that this was necessary to preserve the independence of a media operation that had shifted from being a friend of the apartheid government to a more independent critic of the democratic government. Also, the Chinese government – which keeps an iron grip on its media, and a cast-iron grip on foreign investors — might not allow a foreign company to hold such a large chunk of a media operation unless control was clear and stable and to its liking. The prosperity of Naspers is dependent on its relationship with the Chinese government, not unlike its earlier relationship with the apartheid government. This might explain why during the previous Chinese premier’s visit to SA, Bekker draped a massive banner welcoming him over Naspers’s prominent Cape Town building. Should this relationship go sour, the company would fall apart. Tight control, Bekker has argued, is a necessity. So is size in the global internet market and a steady, long-term view. It is Naspers’s size that allows it to spend more than $1bn in 2017 on development, up 8% from 2016. It lists six companies in its portfolio as three to five years away from reaching their full potential, with five as "high-growth opportunities" and a few that will take five or more years — indicating that it sees significant value coming from a number of its other assets. Shareholders might get a quick profit if they broke up the company now, but then what? That is why he dismissed the agitators so firmly and abruptly at the annual general meeting. Interestingly, Naspers’s apartheid past —when it was known as Nasionale Pers — is coming back to haunt it. Vosloo has portrayed himself and Naspers as key drivers of reform in the National Party and early supporters of negotiations in the 1980s. He refused to go before the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to account for Naspers’s role in apartheid and was livid when a large group of his staff did so and expressed regret for the role the group had played in failing properly to report on the horrors of that period. How embarrassing then when details emerged of company donations to the National Party in the 1980s, including letters of appreciation from Vosloo to former presidents PW Botha and FW de Klerk. These were published recently in Hennie van Vuuren’s book, Apartheid Guns and Money. As late as August 1989, Vosloo was writing to the National Party leadership promising a substantial donation, pledging Naspers’s wholesale support and describing its newspaper Beeld as "your ally" that would help the party "wipe out" the opposition. This is particularly relevant as there has long been speculation over the deal that gave Naspers control of M-Net (now Multichoice and DStv) during that period. Faced with more than 100 applicants for the pay-TV licence in 1982, the government handed it to a consortium of newspaper companies led by Naspers. That payback saved a struggling Naspers and put it on its path of extraordinary growth. It was a mutually beneficial deal: the government gave Naspers control of the pay-TV monopoly and, in return, got the group’s political support at a critical time when it was shoring itself up against local and international pressure. The real surprise was that this monopoly was preserved into the democratic era, giving Media24, the local media operation, the foundation to become the giant of SA’s media sector, with the lion’s share of the newspaper, magazine, book and internet industries. Would it be a good thing for shareholders to break up this operation and realise the full value in it? This might allow for greater diversity and the transformation of the media industry which many are agitating for. But, at a time when the sector is under dire financial pressure — Media24 had a 3% drop in revenue in 2016 and a 34% drop in trading profit — it would remove the protection the international group offers to its domestic operation. Would its newspapers, which have been shedding readership and revenue along with all the others, survive without this big brother? Does this cover allow it to see through the difficult period until the shift to the internet starts to work and new business models revive the news operation? Ironically, some of Media24’s operations have become important carriers of critical, independent journalism, so breaking up the giant might have short-term, quick-profit benefits for shareholders, but uncertain results for the country and its media industry. • Harber is Caxton Professor of Journalism at Wits University. He holds a small number of Naspers shares.