South African Airways (SAA) chairwoman Dudu Myeni should be fired immediately to prevent her continued destruction of the little that is left of the state-owned airline‚ the DA says. It described media reports on Sunday that Myeni would remain until her close friend‚ President Jacob Zuma‚ ends his term in 2019‚ as "simply mind boggling". City Press reported that Myeni had said she would not leave SAA until President Jacob Zuma’s term as president of SA ended, which is in 2019. DA deputy spokesman Alf Lees said he had written to Myeni to request confirmation that these reports were true, and if so‚ why she believed it was in the interest of the crumbling SAA for her to remain‚ despite commitments that her appointment would come to an end at the beginning of September. "It is clearly nonsensical for the Cabinet to once again capitulate to the wishes of a discredited president and to not instruct Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba to adhere to the commitment that was made that Ms Myeni would be appointed as SAA board chair for one year‚" Lees said. SAA was bankrupt and near to liquidation, he noted. Suppliers had not been paid in full in July and August, and the SAA cash flow indicated that they would also not be paid in full in September. "The airline has been running at losses of R350m every month in the current financial year and if it can find benefactors to provided additional cash to pay its staff salaries and suppliers for the second six months of the 2017-18 financial year‚ is heading for a loss of R4bn in the 2017-18 year. "Even if the banks were to miraculously extend their loans to SAA‚ this will not provide any cash and SAA will not be able to continue trading without a cash bail-out from the South African taxpayer. It is certainly not a ‘going concern’‚" Lees said. "There is R6.7bn payable to banks by September 30. National Treasury has already been forced to pay Standard Chartered Bank R2.2bn when they refused to extend the loans to SAA. "City Bank has apparently also refused to extend their loans to SAA beyond September 30 and today there are reports that Nedbank have informed SAA and National Treasury that they will not be able to extend the term of their loan beyond September 30 unless‚ possibly amongst other conditions‚ Ms Myeni is removed [as chairwoman]‚" Lees said. He said it was clear that it was time for Myeni to go. "Keeping her on would be irresponsible and would essentially ensure SAA’s destruction."