SA has climbed out of recession bolstered by a strong performance in the agricultural sector and the recovery is expected to continue at a modest pace in the second half of the year. While second-quarter GDP figures are expected to be the highest this year, it spells a turn for the agricultural sector which has been under pressure. The boost came from the agriculture, forestry and fishing industry which grew by 33.6% and contributed 0.7 of a percentage point to GDP growth. The sector rebounded in the first quarter of 2017 with an increase of 22.2% after eight consecutive quarters of contraction. The growth came on greater production of field crops and horticultural products. On the production side, agriculture and mining will remain the main drivers, but gradual recoveries are also expected from the services and manufacturing sectors as local financial conditions improve and global commodity prices drift higher. Agbiz head of research Wandile Sihlobo said: “These results mirror the increased activity in the overall agricultural sector, particularly summer grains, oilseeds, vegetables, and a slight recovery in livestock.…” The total summer grains production for 2017 is estimated at 18.91-million tonnes, double the previous season’s volume. “We expect this positive growth rate to continue in the coming quarters, but at a relatively lower pace,” added Sihlobo. FNB senior agricultural economist Paul Makube said: “Agriculture has over the past few years contributed less than 2.5% to GDP per year. However, this could even be higher if one considers its forward and backward linkages to other sectors.” While the sector has helped GDP growth considerably, this has not translated into jobs. The second-quarter Labour Force Survey in August showed unemployment remained at 27.7%. “The sector did not contribute significantly to the number of people employed because of mechanisation,” said statistician-general Pali Lehohla. Globally, about 9% of all jobs were expected to disappear as a result of advances in technology, Paul Donovan, global chief economist at UBS Wealth Management, said on Tuesday at a Sasfin Wealth event 