The Treasury has agreed to significantly amend its proposal to repeal the 183-day tax exemption on foreign income earned abroad, by retaining the exemption and introducing a R1m ceiling on what can be claimed under it. Implementation of the proposal will also be postponed until March 1 2020 instead of the initially proposed March 1 2019, in order to give individuals more time to either adjust their contracts or their circumstances, or to formalise their tax status. The introduction of the ceiling will replace the previous proposal to altogether withdraw the tax exemption for the 183 days worked abroad, which elicited a deluge of opposition from South African residents working abroad. The Treasury received more than 1,300 objections to the proposal, mainly from South Africans working in low-or no-tax countries in the Middle East, who would be most affected by it. Many highlighted the adverse financial effect of the measure and raised the issue of SA’s poor employment prospects, which forced them to work abroad. PwC tax policy leader Kyle Mandy said the amendments to the proposal were "more generous" than the PwC recommendation, which was to introduce a threshold but increase the number of days required to be worked abroad in order qualify for the exemption from 183 to about 325 days, to prevent abuse. Treasury officials said this had been considered and rejected because it would hit low-income earners working abroad quite hard as they would not get the tax exemption. South African Institute of Tax Professionals head of tax policy Erika de Villiers welcomed the amendment. Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba still has to approve of the proposed amendments which were presented Thursday by a team of Treasury officials in a presentation to Parliament’s standing committee on finance on Treasury response to public submissions on the draft Taxation Laws Amendment Bill and the draft Tax Administration Laws Amendment Bill. In terms of the proposal the first R1m of foreign remuneration will be exempt from tax in SA "if the individual is outside the republic for more than 183 days as well as for a continuous period of longer than 60 days during a 12-month period", Treasury director for personal income taxes and saving Chris Axelson said. South African tax would apply for foreign-earned income above R1m. "The exemption threshold should reduce the impact of the amendment for lower-to-middle-class South African residents who are earning remuneration abroad. The effect of the exemption will also be that South African tax residents in high-income tax countries are unlikely to be required to pay any additional top up payments to SARS." Axelson said the amendment would address most of the concerns of lower and middle-class individuals such as nurses, teachers and security guards who go overseas looking for work. The amendment was made in response to public comments that the proposal to remove the tax exemption in respect of income from the first 183 days worked abroad would have a severely negative impact on finances and remittances to SA, especially for those earning relatively lower incomes. This includes amounts remitted to finance the living expenses of family members living in SA; investment of foreign income in some family-run businesses and money spent in SA during visits.