Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid) executive director Robert McBride should be suspended or recuse himself as he deals with assault charges, say MPs serving on Parliament’s police committee. McBride was granted R10,000 bail and faces an assault charge in a case involving his daughter. McBride previously battled former police minister Nathi Nhleko to return to the helm of the police watchdog, after the Constitutional Court reaffirmed that the minister did not have the authority to unilaterally suspend the executive director of Ipid. The Constitutional Court judgment means the police minister cannot remove the head of Ipid without consulting with Parliament. However, during a portfolio committee meeting last week, MPs argued that McBride should be given room to answer his current case in court. Freedom Front Plus MP Johannes Groenewald said: "I feel very strongly that McBride should be suspended. "We had an issue with [former acting police commissioner Khomotso] Phahlane and he was suspended. I believe he [McBride] is in a position where he can abuse the resources at his disposal and it is appropriate that he is suspended until this matter is cleared up." Groenewald called for the committee to discuss the possibility of deciding on whether McBride should be suspended, keeping in mind the Constitutional Court ruling. "The law must prevail and although the minister does not have the power to suspend him, we must as a committee initiate a conversation about who initiates the process. It does not help that we wait until he appears in court in October," he said. DA MP Dianne Kohler Barnard agreed with Groenewald and said: "Robert McBride is in a position where staying in his seat is untenable. "He should have done the right thing and recused himself. Any officer accused of this kind of crime would be suspended, so I believe he should leave, and leave quickly, pending the outcome of the investigation," said Kohler Barnard. Only EFF parliamentary representative Sibonakaliso Mhlongo came to McBride’s defence. "We haven’t heard McBride. I would not agree that it [the court case] would be ... considered an immediate threat." ANC MP Angela Molebatsi said McBride had to clarify the charges he faces. Chairman Francois Beukman said the committee would discuss the matter and make a determination during the week. magubanek@businesslive.co.za