London — The US dollar and treasury yields slid on Thursday and were on track for their biggest weekly declines in 2017, after US President Donald Trump said that he would like to see interest rates stay low and that the greenback was too strong. Surprisingly strong Chinese trade figures and Trump’s remarks that the US would not name China a currency manipulator helped boost Asian stocks. But the falling dollar and bond yields weighed on European markets. US futures pointed to a slightly lower open on Wall Street too. "The dollar slid after Trump commented that the currency had risen too high ... [and] saying that he was in favour of low interest rates policy," Mizuho strategists wrote in a note to clients on Thursday. "The US president also appeared to move away from a more confrontational tone against China by acknowledging the country has not intervened to weaken its currency. Following his comments, treasury yields fell to their lowest this year." The dollar index, which tracks the greenback against a basket of six trade-weighted peers, fell 0.6% to 100.07. The benchmark 10-year US treasury yield slid to a five-month low of 2.22%. That put the dollar on course for a fall of more than 1% and the 10-year yield down 13 basis points this week. That would mark the dollar’s steepest weekly fall since before the US presidential election in November and the sharpest yield drop since June last year. Most financial markets are closed on Friday for the Good Friday holiday, and trading volumes on Thursday have been much lighter than usual. The escalating fear of a new weapons test by North Korea kept investors on edge too, as a US carrier group sails towards the area. Concern over the situation in the area has sent the cost to protect South Korean government debt against default soaring to none-and-a-half-month highs. European stocks were lower on Thursday. The pan-European index of leading 300 stocks fell 0.5% to 1,496 points, Germany’s DAX was down 0.4% and Britain’s FTSE 100 was down 0.6%. European bank stocks were among the hardest hit, down more than 1% as the fall in longer-dated bond yields flattened the yield curve. The shrinking premium of long-dated yields over shorter-dated ones hurts banks’ profitability. In an interview with The Wall Street Journal, Trump said he would like to see US interest rates stay low and that the dollar was "getting too strong" and would eventually hurt the economy. In apparent reversals from previous positions, he also said China was not manipulating its currency — doing so would hurt talks with Beijing on dealing with North Korea — and that he would not rule out renominating Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen once her four-year term was up in 2018. Asia MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan was up about 0.5%, while the yen’s earlier strength helped push Japan’s Nikkei down 0.7%. China’s trade surplus with the US, another bone of contention for Trump, widened in March from February, customs data showed on Thursday. China’s overall trade surplus rose in March after logging its first deficit in three years in February. As European trading got under way, the dollar clawed back some of its earlier losses. It was down 0.1% against the yen at ¥108.90, after touching a five-month low of ¥108.70. The euro was a touch weaker at $1.0650, after rising as high as $1.0677. The euro and eurozone bond yields were also vulnerable to investor unease around the first round of the French presidential election on April 23. Markets are uneasy about the victory chances of both far-right leader Marine le Pen, who has pledged to seek to take France out of the euro, and far-left candidate Jean-Luc Melenchon, who has seen his support climb in the polls. "I think the price action in core yields is mainly shaped by the rising geopolitical concerns but also French election nerves increasing safe-haven flows," said ING strategist Martin van Vliet. In commodities, oil prices fell on concern about rising US output. US crude slipped 0.3% to $52.95 a barrel, extending Wednesday’s 0.5% loss that saw it break a six-session winning streak. Global benchmark Brent was also down 0.3% at $55.70, failing to make up any of Wednesday’s 0.7% loss. Gold pared earlier gains but hovered near a five-month high hit earlier in the session. The precious metal was up about 0.1% at $1,287/oz. Reuters