Big business cannot simply refuse to pay taxes to force President Jacob Zuma to resign, as this would break the law and disadvantage the poor, said JSE CEO Nicky Newton-King. "It is not for [business] to pick and choose which laws to comply with. We have to work within the law," Newton-King said in response to a question at a Gordon Institute of Business Science (Gibs) alumni event on Wednesday night. It was not legal to pay tax into a trust account rather than directly to the government and this would also put serious pressure on the poor, as the state would not be able to deliver essential services, such as social grants, she said. SA faced a crisis of political, business and personal leadership and all South Africans needed to take responsibility for the way forward, Newton-King said. Her comments follow the removal of finance minister, Pravin Gordhan and his deputy, Mcebisi Jonas in a late-night Cabinet reshuffle last week by President Jacob Zuma. The political manoeuvring was shortly followed by a downgrade of SA’s foreign-currency credit rating to subinvestment grade by S&P Global Ratings on Monday. The downgrade was a "very serious problem" for the country, Newton-King said. Low economic growth leading to higher unemployment meant the government collected less tax revenue and was forced to borrow money in the capital markets, for which it would now pay more, she said. By paying more for its debt it would have less money to spend in the economy. "The entire fabric of society collapses once you start to get into downgrade territory. This will require all of us to stand up and decide what to do to make a difference." It takes an average of six to eight years for a country to regain investment status after a downgrade. However, some countries, such as South Korea and Romania, regained their investment-grade status after just two to three years. Newton-King urged the Gibs alumni and all South Africans to hold politicians and state-owned companies (SOCs) accountable. Ordinary South Africans could offer to lend skills and expertise to SOCs, she said. But Bonang Mohale, deputy chairman of Business Leadership SA (BLSA), said the current ANC administration had demonstrated that it did not want competence. Why else would it keep "problematic offenders", such as Hlaudi Motsoeneng and Dudu Myeni, in their positions, he said. "The root cause is not the ANC, not the president alone, it’s the state of capture," Mohale said. Referring to the Guptas, he said: “Here is a family"Here is a family determining who should and should not be minister, or the head of an SOC. That’s what should concern all of us. How do we put a country for sale and allow a president [who] has been captured to act in a manner not in the best interest of the country?" Mohale said he was "gutted" that the ANC’s national working committee (NWC) had "[beaten] into submission" Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, ANC treasurer-general Zweli Mkhize and ANC secretary-general Gwede Mantashe. "The bravery of the top three in speaking out ... is what is required of leadership." BDlive reported on Thursday that an apology by Zuma for the manner in which he had undertaken his Cabinet reshuffle had "tamed" detractors in an extended ANC NWC meeting. Radical economic transformation did not amount to looting for cadres, Mohale said. Rather, it would by demonstrated by, for example, granting new casino licences to previously disadvantaged individuals; returning African Bank back to the National African Federated Chamber of Commerce; and stopping irregular and wasteful expenditure by the state, he said.