Cecil Afrika has always been a key playmaker for the Blitzboks‚ but this weekend in Hong Kong, as he celebrates his 50th World Series tournament‚ the veteran will need to be at his best. The Blitzboks have never won in Hong Kong‚ which is the only blot on their record. The tournament in the Chinese city is the most prestigious on the circuit‚ given its long history and one that has eluded SA time and again. Afrika‚ at 29‚ is running out of time to add a Hong Kong gold medal to his glittering collection of silverware and in 2017, it will be even harder due to injuries that have decimated the squad. Star players such as Roscko Speckman‚ Justin Geduld‚ Stephan Dippenaar and Kyle Brown are out injured. And others such as Seabelo Senatla and Kwagga Smith are on Super Rugby duty. "A couple of years back, I picked up a bad injury in Hong Kong‚" Afrika said. "Such was the extent of the injury, I was told that I would be lucky to get another year playing rugby. "Luckily, it turned out that the injury was not that bad‚ and here I am going back to the same venue to play in my 50th tournament," he said. "In a way‚ it is a bittersweet feeling because I thought my career was over when I got injured there and now I will reach a tournament milestone at the same venue." And all his experience and skill will be needed to shepherd a youthful group that includes new cap Selwyn Davids‚ who replaces Speckman. "I am not going to try and be Roscko‚" said Davids. "I will rather listen to the advice from Roscko himself‚ who told me I should go and be Selvyn Davids and not someone else. This helped a lot as I am just going to go out there to express myself and contribute to the team effort." Tim Agaba‚ who was part of the team that won the Olympic Games bronze medal in Rio in 2016‚ is back for the first time this season after a long ankle injury lay-off to give coach Neil Powell something to smile about. And the exceptional Branco du Preez‚ who was in doubt for this event‚ was cleared to play, which is good news. SA lead the 2016-17 World Series with 126 points after winning four of the six rounds. England are 23 points behind, with four rounds remaining. "We can only go out and do our best. "We had some good results at other venues‚ but this one keeps eluding us. We will be keen to change that‚" Afrika said. TMG Digital