Hong Kong — Asian stocks edged up on Wednesday, helped by a bounce in Chinese shares, although investors held off from making big bets before a highly anticipated summit between US President Donald Trump and his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping gets under way on Thursday. European stocks were set to follow Asia’s steady lead with index futures pointing to a slightly higher start. Chinese construction shares were among the top gainers after Beijing on Saturday announced plans to build Xiongan New Area, modelled on the Shenzhen special economic zone next to Hong Kong that helped kick-start China’s economic reforms in 1980. "This is a very headline-driven market and the only source of optimism is the new economic zone news over the weekend — but that is unlikely to be sustainable," said Conita Hung, an independent market strategist in Hong Kong. Shares in more than 30 listed companies expected to benefit from the new zone jumped by the 10% daily trade limit. Mainland markets reopened on Wednesday for trading after a long weekend and outperformed regional bourses, rising more than 1%. Hong Kong stocks gave up early gains and were flat on the day. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan rose 0.1%, edging back towards a 19-month high hit on March 30. India’s shares opened at a record high before retreating. Energy-related shares also offered some support to investors as oil prices rose on Tuesday thanks to an unplanned production outage in the North Sea and growing concern about diminishing US oil stocks. US crude rose for a second consecutive session to its highest levels in more than a month at $51.37 a barrel on Wednesday. Still, investors remained broadly cautious with safe-haven assets such as gold and Japanese yen remaining well supported before the landmark Trump-Xi summit on Thursday and Friday. It will be their first face-to-face meeting since Trump took office on January 20, with trade and security issues set to feature prominently. The Korean Peninsula has been a notable hot spot of geopolitical tension, with North Korea firing a medium-range ballistic missile from its east coast into the sea on the eve of the summit. "Markets are really on hold at the moment," said Ric Spooner, chief market strategist at CMC markets, adding that investors were looking to catalysts from the Trump-Xi meeting as well as the US earnings season. Gold held near a one-month high at $1,254.45/oz, rising nearly 4.7% in the past three weeks. Major currencies traded in a narrow range ahead of the release of minutes from the Fed March meeting in which it raised interest rates, and before the big US jobs report on Friday. The greenback got some help from Japanese importers on a "gotobi" date — the fifth day of the month and dates that are multiple of five — on which accounts are traditionally settled. The dollar held firm at ¥110.61 against the Japanese currency. "Today, there is real demand for the dollar on ‘gotobi’, so its downside should be limited," said Kaneo Ogino, director at foreign exchange research firm Global-info in Tokyo. The dollar index, which tracks the greenback against a basket of six trade-weighted peers, was broadly flat at 100.52. The euro was a shade stronger at $1.06795. Bonds came in for some profit-taking after yields fell in the previous sessions. Yields on two-year US treasury bonds rose to 1.26% after hitting a six-week low of 1.226% on Monday. Reuters