The debate about a provisional safeguard duty of 13.9% imposed in December 2016 on EU imports of bone-in chicken has highlighted challenges faced by local producers of poultry products. The poultry industry criticised the provisional duty as inadequate to deal with the crisis caused by the import of bone-in chicken portions from the EU. It applied for a 37% duty, citing the need for the local industry to remain viable. It is not contested that the poultry industry contributes significantly to the economy. The South African Poultry Association estimates that the poultry industry provides direct and indirect employment for more than 100,000 people in the wider poultry value chain. Poultry consumption in SA, according to the association, reached almost 38kg per capita in 2014, with beef consumption a distant second at 18kg per capita. Poultry meat has also consistently been the most affordable source of animal protein since 2009. However, over the past 12 months the average retail price of frozen chicken portions has increased more than 20%, despite the corresponding increase in import volumes over the same period, a sign that the local industry is fast losing its competitiveness. The pending retrenchment of 1,350 employees by RCL Foods, one of the country’s biggest poultry producers, is cause for concern. This comes after the closure of Mike’s Chickens, a family-owned business in Polokwane that was forced to exit the industry in 2016 after 38 years in existence. This resulted in more than 1,000 job losses. Country Bird, the third-largest broiler producer in the country, has also announced its intention to retrench 1,500 employees. This is worrisome in light of the Competition Commission’s previous interventions at the breeding stock level of the poultry value chain. Country Bird’s history is worth noting here. In 2007, the company lodged a complaint with the Competition Commission regarding exclusionary conduct by Astral Foods through the Elite Breeding Farms partnership, which prevented it from gaining access to breeding stock and from becoming an effective vertically integrated competitor in the market. The commission found Astral Foods had engaged in exclusionary conduct in contravention of the Competition Act, which Astral Foods acknowledged. The matter was subsequently settled with the commission in 2013. After Country Bird’s exit from the Elite Breeding Farms partnership, it was able to introduce a competing breed into the South African poultry value chain. This allowed it to become a successful vertically integrated competitor in the market. However, Country Bird’s current challenges suggest that the previous interventions by the commission were not sufficient to tackle all the broader challenges that plague the industry. It is evident that a strong collaborative effort is required between the government, business and labour to stem the tide of job losses and the exit of market participants. More important is the need for a constructive, long-term approach to resolving these challenges. Such an approach should acknowledge that increasing import duties while ignoring some of the other challenges faced by local poultry producers may not provide a long-term solution to ensure the sustainability of the industry. In the past decade, the industry has faced several significant challenges that have hindered its growth potential and competitiveness. These are much broader than import penetration alone. One of the main challenges is its highly concentrated nature, an outcome of the significant barriers to entry along the entire poultry value chain. The value chain is dominated by a few large, vertically integrated companies that have the capital required to achieve the economies of scale necessary for a sustainable business operation. These firms’ subsidiaries are active at all levels of the value chain, from the upstream production of animal feed to the downstream abattoirs where broilers are slaughtered and processed for consumption — a pre-1994 legacy. The vertical integration in the domestic poultry industry should be yielding lower production costs and lower prices to consumers, yet that is not the case. This anomaly requires further probing. Small market participants that are not vertically integrated are at a distinct disadvantage to bigger competitors because they rely on their major competitors for crucial inputs such as animal feed and breeding stock. Industry transformation should also be prioritised. This can be achieved by assisting entrants to the sector to attain economies of scale, which will in turn ensure that they become sustainable competitors in the market. Incumbent firms should not just demand protection from the government but provide solutions that would unlock the market structure for these entrants to thrive. Immediate solutions — as also noted by others — could include supplier-development, measures to increase market access, vertical separation and collaborative research and development initiatives. The cost inefficiencies of producing poultry products in SA should be urgently tackled if the industry wishes to secure its long-term sustainability. Of critical importance, and as noted by the University of Johannesburg’s Centre for Competition, Regulation and Economic Development, is the high cost of animal feed. The economic inefficiency of local producers implies that the industry will struggle to remain competitive. There should be willingness from local producers and policy-makers to acknowledge and tackle the challenges the local industry faces on the domestic front urgently and resist the temptation to look only for short-term solutions. Equally, where there is dumping of imports, the protection of the domestic industry becomes a necessity. • Ratshisusu is deputy commissioner of the Competition Commission