I remember when we first got a TV, in the days when the test pattern was on all day, and how my grandfather used to watch it, daydreaming to the music it provided.I also remember waiting for 6pm, freshly bathed and in my pyjamas, and watching my first shows. Chips. Sha Na Na. The A-Team. Then, as a young teen, taping music videos off Pop Shop onto the VCR.The TV became a hearth for the family &ndash; "Hurry up, it&rsquo;s starting," someone would yell. "Bring the salt and pepper!"You paid your TV licence. It was the right thing to do, so it was said, although that particular catchphrase only emerged much later. In the early days, it was more like: "You&rsquo;ll go to jail if you don&rsquo;t."The absurdity of it startled my young mind. I imagined the Kafkaesque result of someone like my hard-working father being dragged off to a grey courtroom for not paying the TV licence, and what might happen to him.Now, every December, an auto-generated threat from the SABC exhorts me to pay my TV licence or incur the wrath of the state&rsquo;s official organ of communication. My tennis partner and I mutter obscenities, cursing and fuming, but inevitably chicken out and pay up.Among some other things (pots, pans and children), I lost my TV set in my divorce, but replaced it recently, to stream movies. I do not use it for any other purpose.Besides, why would I actually want to watch anything on SABC? Have you seen any of the locally produced shows lately? Politely put, someone&rsquo;s making money, that&rsquo;s for sure.I don&rsquo;t want to endorse them, nor the nonexistent SABC board, nor the shenanigans of the self-declared genius that has torpedoed the institution and harmed people who were simply trying to do their job. So I will not be paying my TV licence.It is a small measure of defiance that I, as a citizen, hold. It may not be dissimilar to the year when the white teenage intake to the South African Defence Force failed to pitch up and the state realised they had a problem and scrapped conscription.If we all withheld our licence fee, then maybe the apparatchiks who "run" the place would come to their senses. I know it&rsquo;s a long shot to assume there are any senses to come to, but one has to try.We want a public broadcaster that is in the public&rsquo;s interest. Our prescient communications minister sure ain&rsquo;t gonna do it for us.So, aluta continua! Don&rsquo;t pay your TV licence &mdash; it&rsquo;s the right thing to do.&bull; O&rsquo;Connor is a theatre maker, facilitator, writer, gardener and father.