The South African Communist Party (SACP) believes a "third force" is behind the simmering tensions between it and the ANC, its alliance partner, in Inchanga, KwaZulu-Natal. More than eight people have been killed since January 2016, when clashes between SACP and ANC supporters broke out. Most of those killed were shot execution-style by unknown gunmen, who are still at large. On Tuesday, SACP district chairman Mdu Ziqubu said the party strongly believed those behind the killings were hell-bent on driving a wedge between the alliance partners. "It is our view, these killings are not just political.… Clearly, this is the work of a third force," he said. Ziqubu said the SACP urged the government to increase police presence in the area. "They must bring police from outside who are going to be visible all over. Local people said they do not trust local police to do their work without fear and favour. They want the cases to be investigated by outside detectives, who will not be easily bribed," he said. SACP member Londiwe Mhlongo, 32, was shot and killed by unknown gunmen on Sunday, when she and two friends were walking on Inchanga Street, making her the latest victim of the escalating tensions. Residents fear her death will be followed by others. In December 2016, three people were killed. After the August 3 local government elections, SACP Inchanga branch leader Nontsikelelo Blose, 40, and the ANC’s Xolani Ngcobo, 38, were killed in what were believed to be revenge killings. Other victims include the SACP’s Phillip Dlamini, 68, Bongani Hlatshwayo, 38, and Siyabonga Ngubo, 38. Bhoyi Shozi, an ANC leader in the area, whose two brothers were killed in December, said the governing party was also worried about the attacks. He said three people had been attacked since last Thursday, two of whom had survived. "The SACP and the ANC are alliance partners and these killings are puzzling us. We hope the police will move swiftly to arrest the perpetrators before they strike again," he said. In 2016, KwaZulu-Natal Premier Willies Mchunu appointed a commission of inquiry headed by advocate Marumo Moerane SC to look into political killings in the province. Vasu Gounden and Cheryl Potgieter are inquiry members and Sol Mdledle will serve as the inquiry’s secretary. Ndabe Sibiya, Mchunu’s spokesman, said on Tuesday the commission was setting up logistics so witnesses could come forward with evidence. Sibiya said the commission would be investigating the spate of killings in Inchanga.