Reinet, the investment company controlled by the Rupert family, continues to lessen its reliance on tobacco slowly. A management statement for the third quarter of the financial year to end March, released on Tuesday, showed the 3.7% holding in cigarette giant British American Tobacco (BAT) represented 67% of Reinet’s €5.5bn portfolio. In the September quarter BAT — Reinet’s sole investment, aside from cash, when it listed in late 2008 — represented more than 70% of the portfolio. At the end of March 2012 the tobacco interests represented more than 87% of the portfolio. While Reinet has diversified its portfolio into numerous direct and fund-aligned investments, the company is still largely viewed by the market as a proxy for BAT. Reinet’s holding in BAT is worth €3.7bn. Reinet has also made a promising investment in UK-based financial services specialist Pension Insurance Corporation (PensCorp). PensCorp provides tailored pension insurance buyouts and buy-ins to the trustees and sponsors of UK defined-benefit pension funds. The management statement valued Reinet’s investment in PensCorp slightly higher at €1.1bn, representing about 20% of the total portfolio. Reinet indicated that the valuation of PensCorp, which is unlisted, reflected increases in comparable valuation multiples that were applied by the market in valuing listed companies in the UK insurance sector. The estimated fair value of PensCorp was also boosted by the strengthening of the pound against the euro in the quarter. Reinet chairman Johann Rupert noted that in the final six months of 2016 PensCorp had insured £140m of the ICI Specialty Chemicals Pension Fund, £250m of the Smiths Industries Pension Scheme and £230m of the Pilkington Pension Scheme. Rupert said PensCorp had also completed a £150m pensioner buy-in and invested in Hertfordshire Housing. The new year saw further business gains for PensCorp with Rupert disclosing that the company had signed a £190m pensioner buyout of the GKN Group Pension Scheme and a £90m Civil Aviation Authority Pension Scheme buy-in in January. PensCorp’s new business pipeline remained encouraging. There were also value gains across several investment funds that Reinet participates in, although these values were in some instances boosted by additional investments. Trilantic Capital Partners (the old Lehman Brothers private equity business) was valued at €186m, markedly higher than the €161m recorded for the end-September quarter. Rupert attributed the increase to capital contributions of €10m, increases in the estimated fair value of underlying investments and the strengthening of the dollar against the euro during the quarter. There were also increases in value for Renshaw Bay and related investments (€189m), Asian private equity (€182m), the specialised private equity cluster (€179m) as well as real estate investments in the US (€158m).