The MTN executives who were on the receiving end of the share allocations at the end of December are already comfortably in the money. The date of the transaction was December 28, and the market price at which the shares were awarded was R120. On Wednesday, just a week later, the share price had already bumped up to R129.The actual vesting of the shares is subject to performance conditions and, presumably, if the MTN share price slumps below R120 before they vest in three years time, the executives will be able to walk away without handing over any money.So, for the lucky executives, 2016 ended on a reasonably upbeat note. The same cannot be said for most of the other shareholders who are unable to walk away from their MTN shares without taking a hefty loss.It was a torrid year for this once high-flying company. Most of 2016 was dominated by a series of fumbles concerning the multibillion-dollar Nigerian fine, highlighting weaknesses in management. It seemed this was a business that could only cope with success.As the year came to a close, things appeared to have stabilised, but by November, there was still time for a few fumbles. The new black economic empowerment scheme was handled in a remarkably haphazard manner. Not only was the old MTN Zakhele scheme wound up at a disappointing R112, but the new Futhi scheme was so poorly launched, it failed to spark much interest. The R112 for MTN Zakhele did represent an attractive return on the R20 invested four years earlier, but looked quite feeble compared with the R260 at which the share was trading in late 2014.Late in December, Edcon filed for chapter 15 cross-border bankruptcy protection in a US court. The move was not unexpected because some of the apparel retailer&rsquo;s big creditors are based in the US.On the same day that Edcon launched this step, back at home, it began to implement the final terms of a restructuring.The home stretch included coaxing creditors to take less than they were owed. For example, the company said it would exchange $1.4bn of claims by a class of senior secured lenders for $665m in notes issued by a new holding company as well as equity in that company.These comprise agreements were accepted two days before the end of 2016. They were key to the restructuring process, which is intended to cut the group&rsquo;s debt position from about R29bn to about R7bn.Back in the US, Edcon had to persuade the court that the US should recognise the proceedings at home. A chapter 15 case must be filed in the US Bankruptcy Court by a foreign representative requesting the recognition of a foreign proceeding. The petition must prove that the proceeding exists.Charles Mzwandile Vikisi cited "continued unfavourable economic conditions" as well as the slowdown in unsecured lending in SA.Vikisi said that allowing the South African proceedings to continue would not undermine the rights of the creditors in the US as they would have the right to prosecute their claims as part of those proceedings.The US Bankruptcy Court has scheduled a hearing about the petition for January 18.The protracted effort to save the business continues.&bull; Neels Blom edits Company Comment (blomn@bdlive.co.za)