Eskom board chairman Ben Ngubane could be removed from his position at the power utility should some MPs have their way. During deliberations on the draft report on the SABC inquiry on Tuesday, some members of Parliament’s ad hoc committee looking into the crisis at the public broadcaster suggested that Parliament probe Ngubane’s fitness as Eskom chairman in light of his role in the demise of the public broadcaster. Ngubane, a former KwaZulu-Natal premier and national arts and culture minister, chaired the SABC board from December 2009 until he resigned amid controversy in March 2013. He was appointed as chairman of the Eskom board in 2015. Ngubane was also implicated in former public protector Thuli Madonsela’s swan song State of Capture report. The report, which President Jacob Zuma is challenging in court, criticises Eskom over improper hiring of its board and questions its deals with Gupta-linked mining company Tegeta and the acquisition of the Optimum mine. Ngubane has hit out at Madonsela, accusing her of denying Eskom executives the right of reply. The Guptas also featured in the SABC inquiry with some witnesses alleging the family at some point tried to gain control of the public broadcaster. Ngubane was grilled by the ad hoc committee earlier in January on his role at the SABC, including how Hlaudi Motsoeneng, the controversial former chief operating officer, had come to occupy senior positions at the broadcaster even though he did not have a matric. Motsoeneng is seen as the architect of the demise of successive SABC boards. The public protector’s 2014 report into a governance crisis at the broadcaster effectively found Ngubane had failed in his fiduciary duties at the SABC. "Ben Ngubane was a bad witness and embarrassing at times…. The public enterprises [portfolio] committee should probe his fitness as Eskom chairman," said DA MP and member of the ad hoc committee Mike Waters. ACDP MP Steve Swartz said Ngubane had to be given a chance to respond to such a recommendation in the draft report. "We should say we are considering referring his conduct to the Public Enterprises Committee," said Swartz. But ANC MP Makhosi Khoza said the committee might be "jumping the gun" by asking that Ngubane’s fitness to hold office at Eskom be probed. Another ANC MP, Fezeka Loliwe, also suggested that such a recommendation about Ngubane was not within the ad hoc committee’s purview. Ad hoc committee chairman Vincent Smith said there was no consensus on the recommendation and therefore the matter would be deliberated further on Thursday before a final draft report was adopted on Friday.