Palladium is set to continue its upward trajectory in 2017 and could even overshadow the gains it made in 2016. Since the start of the year, the metal has shot up by almost 10% to reach $746/oz by the close on Friday. Analysts expect the metal to continue its rise.What is making palladium such a hot commodity is its use in catalytic converters to convert as much as 90% of the harmful gases in automobile exhausts, such as hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide, into less noxious substances. Car makers started using palladium instead of platinum in catalytic converters as the price of the latter precious metal skyrocketed.The manufacturing sector purchasing managers&rsquo; index for both China and US rose in December, which indicates that car manufacturers could have a good year in 2017. The tax cuts that are expected to be implemented by US president-elect Donald Trump when he takes office, along with higher spending by the Chinese government, are also set to boost car sales.Palladium had a good year in 2016, with the price rising by 18% and outperforming other precious metals like gold and platinum. Demand for the metal, which is mainly mined in Russia and SA, outstripped supply. Chemical company Johnson Matthey&rsquo;s precious metals division reported that there was a deficit in the market of about 600,000oz in 2016, something that is also expected in 2017.Mergence Investment Managers resource analyst Thobela Bixa says the prospects for palladium in 2017 are looking good, helped by optimism about global economic growth. "Given that we start the year 2017 without fears of &lsquo;China&rsquo;s hard-landing&rsquo;, passenger car sales continue to grow, diesel cars continue to lose market share to petrol, and the palladium market will likely print another deficit in 2017, that should bode well for a palladium price up-tick. By how much is anyone&rsquo;s guess."Palladium, along with platinum, rhodium, ruthenium, iridium and osmium, form the platinum group metals&nbsp;(PGMs), which have similar chemical properties.The price of palladium is mainly driven by the use of the metal in the autocatalyst industry, industrial uses, jewellery manufacture and the electronics sector. In 2016 the autocatalyst sector once again set a new consumption record, using 7.84-million ounces of palladium, which was more than 2% higher than the previous year.But palladium has it limits, says analyst Rene Carlo Hochreiter from Noah Capital Markets. He does not see the palladium price overtaking the platinum price in 2017 but does expect the price to continue to rise during the year, along with all other PGMs.Hochreiter says the palladium price could reach an average of $800oz in 2017. "It needs to get to $900 odd and stay there for a while to average $800 for the year, so $900 is possible during [2017]".SA Anglo American Platinum CEO Chris Griffiths remarked in the company s interim results in 2016 that the demand forecast for palladium remained strong, benefiting from car production growth in China, the largest market for petrol-fuelled cars. The firm is the largest producer of palladium in SA. Hochreiter describes this as "quite a nice bonus for SA producers".One possible threat to the palladium price in 2017 is the effect the much-anticipated electric cars could have once they hit the market if they are well received. General Motor s 2017 Chevrolet Bolt, which has a range of 386km, is expected to be released during the US spring, while Tesla s first mass-market electric vehicle could be out by the end of the year.Hochreiter says while electric vehicles had only a negligible market share in 2016, by some estimates, this could rise to 35% by 2040.