Discussions with major operators in the information and communications technology (ICT) sector on the implementation plan for the government’s radio spectrum policy are far advanced, Telecommunications and Postal Services Minister Siyabonga Cwele said on Tuesday. He said the engagements were progressing well and would be finalised by the end of February. The implementation plan would be submitted to the Cabinet and Parliament, as some aspects would require legislation. Cwele, speaking to Business Day on the sidelines of a meeting of Parliament’s telecommunications and postal services committee, said the aim of the consultations was to ensure the policy was implemented in a manner that was least disruptive to the industry. The main aim of the policy was the equitable allocation of radio spectrum. An issue that has been discussed is high-demand spectrum, which has been allocated licensed until 2027, while spectrum is renewed annually. Investments are made on the basis of allocated spectrum, and the aim of the discussions with the industry was to provide certainty, Cwele said. He said the government did not want operators to reduce their investment on the basis of the new policy. It had assured them it had no intention to cause uncertainty about current investments. Discussions had also been held with the Independent Communications Authority of SA, which in 2016 instituted an unsuccessful bid to auction radio spectrum that was quashed in the high court following legal action by Cwele. Vodacom Group CEO Shameel Joosub said on Tuesday: "While it is still early days in the entire process, we have been involved in constructive engagements… to find a workable solution to make broadband even more accessible and affordable for South Africans. These engagements are on-going and have the intent of delivering on the objectives of the white paper." MTN SA CEO Mteto Nyati said: "MTN remains hopeful the concerns identified in the ICT policy white paper will be understood … and a solution that is in the best interests of the industry and all parties involved will be found." Telkom spokeswoman Jacqui O’Sullivan said: "The government’s efforts should be geared towards creating an ICT sector underpinned by enhanced competitiveness, regulatory certainty and predictability." With Thabiso Mochiko