The South African Football Association (Safa) should be prepared to pay in the region of R50m a year if they are to hire former England coach Roy Hodgson as the new Bafana Bafana mentor. If the rumour mill is to be believed‚ Hodgson has become the latest name to be linked to the job vacated by the sacked Ephraim "Shakes" Mashaba. But it is not clear if Hodgson‚ whose name has curiously appeared out of nowhere as one of the candidates for the Bafana job‚ would be interested in taking a salary cut. Mashaba was paid R500,000 a month, while the well-travelled Hodgson was the best-paid manager at the 2016 Euro Championship earning a whopping £3.5m a year. His salary put him ahead of the £3.15m earned by Antonio Conte of Italy and the £2.7m earned by Turkey’s Fatih Terim. Mashaba was sacked in December with a year left on his contract‚ which was to run until the end of the World Cup in Russia in July 2018. His dismissal followed a disciplinary hearing that found him guilty of gross misconduct‚ insubordination and bringing Safa into disrepute. Last week‚ Carlos Queiroz said he would be interested in returning to the Bafana hot seat if his current employers‚ the Iran FA‚ accepted his resignation. "At the moment‚ as you can understand‚ I have ethical duties and obligations with my present contract and I am not in a position to make comments about that in a public way‚" he said. "But if SA‚ or any other country‚ remembers your name and trusts your name as a person to coach the national team‚ for a coach, it’s always an honour and something really very special. "You are coaching the flag and the nation and the expectations and the dreams of one entire country." Locally‚ Pitso Mosimane, coach of PSL champions Mamelodi Sundowns and recently crowned the 2016 Caf coach of the year‚ insisted that he was out of contention for the vacant position. But his boss Patrice Motsepe made things interesting a day after the comments, when he said he would consider it his "patriotic duty" to allow the in-demand mentor to ascend to national-team level if he wanted the job. TMG Digital