Anglo American would not restructure any coal assets that belonged to Eskom without its permission, Eskom interim CEO Matshela Koko said on Tuesday. Eskom does not own any mines. But is has historical contracts with a number of mining companies such as Anglo American and Exxaro whereby it not only pays for the coal it sources from these mines but also pays for the development of the mines themselves. It was these developments that entitled Eskom to be consulted, Koko said. However, in the past couple of years these coal contracts have been a cost to the company and Eskom has been vocal about exiting contracts with the cost plus mines. "They are our assets, we will decide what to do with them, they are free to do what they want to do with their own assets but the ones that belong to Eskom we will decide on what to do with them," Koko said. Anglo American, which mines coal for Eskom, has three coal assets that belong to Eskom — Kriel, New Denmark and New Vaal. Eskom did not renew its Arnot mine contract with Exxaro in 2016 after a dispute about the cost of coal that it said Exxaro was costing it. Exxaro, which is caught in a dispute with Eskom over losing 50% of its black economic empowerment (BEE) shareholding, down to 30%, was also in a 40-year contract with Eskom over coal supply to its Medupi power station because of the long-standing relationship the two parties have. Koko said Eskom should have been consulted about the drop in the company’s BEE shareholding. "Now, part of the reason Medupi was built where it was built was because we wanted to support Exxaro as a black mining company. To read in the newspapers that they will be reducing their shareholder from 50% to 30% after what we have done to support them is a slap in the face," Koko said. Anglo American has initiated a process to exit its Eskom-tied mines. "Throughout this process, Anglo American has held discussions with and continues to engage both Eskom and the government. We are confident that we will reach a favourable outcome," Coal SA spokesman Moeketsi Mofokeng said. Speculation has it that Anglo wants to sell some of the assets to empowerment companies. Public Enterprises Minister Lynne Brown, who was initially going to intervene in the matter between Eskom and Exxaro, said that she was not going to do so any more. She said it was disappointing that Exxaro reduced its shareholding. She added that she supported Eskom’s policy of 50% BEE ownership as it was a national imperative to radically transform the nation. "We have got to learn as South Africans that we have got to share the wealth of the country and we actually have an opportunity to do so. "Eskom will continue to source coal as with renewable energy at the right quality at the right price. I would like to believe that there are good business principles that will benefit the South African consumer," Brown said.