I often read my three-year old the story of the Ugly Duckling. To her it is just a bedtime story, but of course it is full of profound subtext that reminds us that no matter who we are and what cards we have been dealt, we can all hide something incredible, even beautiful and full of potential.When Porsche unveiled the first generation of the Panamera, there were many who referred to it as an ugly duckling. There is no arguing it wasn&rsquo;t pretty, but beneath its looks was a vehicle that was every bit the Stuttgart executive. From the entry-level to the turbocharged variant, it had levels of performance and handling ability that shamed executive sedan rivals. Push it hard and it relished every moment, showing its soul and providing a limit that was almost on a par with the iconic 911.Recently I travelled to Dubai to get to grips with the second generation. Granted, Dubai is not the ideal location to delve into the new model&rsquo;s character. The roads are mostly long and straight and the organisers had to set up a gymkhana in the car park of the Sevens stadium. Here the Panamera 4 and Turbo models showed incredible levels of grip, thanks to various specification options that included things like all-wheel drive and four-wheel steering.The new 4D Active Chassis Control kept the car remarkably flat in spite of its size and, quite honestly, no 7 Series, A8 or S-Class would have kept things so in check through a series of slalom cones and tight turns. The gymkhana was the only chance we had to experience the Turbo version, so instead let me turn your attention to the Panamera 4S.First, the issue of the styling. Gone are the ugly duckling looks, replaced by a design that looks meaner, giving the new Panamera a more athletic look. Creases and lines have been added in all the right places, but the big changes are at the rear, which was the most controversial area of the original. Now it is clean, with a 911 style look about it. There are three-dimensional tail lights, a light strip that runs the full width and edges that replace the bulbous look of the last generation.The interior was never an area of criticism in the old model, but with technology moving on rapidly in rival models, Porsche has upped its game.The interior design is simpler than before, with a wide, slim dashboard that harks back to Porsches of old. It&rsquo;s modern, elegant and clearly focused on the driver. The materials are excellent and the build quality seemed to be superb.Gone are the traditional buttons on the centre console, replaced by touch panel buttons. It takes a while to get used to where everything is to avoid taking your eyes off the road, but it is possible not to have to use them at all because there is a true tech masterpiece in the top of the dash in the form of a new 12.3-inch touchscreen display that provides access to almost everything, even Twitter.The system can be personalised in the same way as a tablet, with the ability to swipe in the apps and information you want displayed on your home screen, from drive mode settings to the weather, navigation and your media streaming. Spend time getting to know it and you will feel more connected to the car and to the world. You can also mirror your smartphone using Apple Carplay.The instrument cluster also contains two seven-inch digital displays either side of the rev counter. These can show your navigation options, map, audio choices or performance data.On the steering wheel there are multiple controls to allow you to remain focused on that winding mountain pass as you flick through your favourite songs and you also have the same driving mode dial as other Porsche models. It also features a 20-second full attack Sport Response button which livens everything up at a level beyond Sport Plus.You still only get four seats though, but opt for the Executive versions and you get a slightly longer wheelbase with more legroom for those in the rear.From the new twin turbo V6 engine in the 4S to the infotainment package, the new Panamera has matured into a true multidiscipline sports athlete.