Hawks head Berning Ntlemeza informed the Gupta family through their lawyer, Gert van der Merwe, a week ago that they were not under investigation — even though the Hawks had received reports of 72 suspicious transactions through their businesses’ bank accounts from the Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC) in the past four years. Ntlemeza’s assurance is contained in a letter dated January 16. It is attached to an answering affidavit filed by Oakbay Investments CE Ronica Ragavan in an application brought by Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan. Gordhan approached the High Court in Pretoria for a declaratory order on whether the finance minister could intervene between banks and their clients. His founding affidavit contained a certificate from the FIC listing "suspicious" bank transactions totalling almost R6.8bn by companies owned by the family, which could have contributed to the decisions by the nation’s big banks to close their accounts. The matter is expected to be heard on March 28. Commercial crimes are investigated by the Hawks. The FIC does not have the authority to investigate suspicious transactions itself and can only report them to investigating authorities. Ntlemeza’s letter to Van der Merwe said there were no pending complaints relating to the family and the Oakbay group of companies. "This office also wishes to confirm that there are no reports nor complaints relating to this matter that were received from the banks or the FIC as cited in your correspondence," he wrote in the letter. "This office also wishes to confirm that [the case] ... relating to the suspicious transaction reports involving your clients is dealt with by this office, but presently there is no evidence that implicates your clients." Ntlemeza’s letter is surprising, since apart from the FIC certificates on the various transactions, the EFF and AfriForum have also brought criminal complaints against the Guptas. The EFF laid charges of racketeering, money laundering and corruption against Atul, Rajesh, Ajay and Varun Gupta, as well as against President Jacob Zuma’s son Duduzane, Mineral Resources Minister Mosebenzi Zwane and the directors of Gupta-held companies. AfriForum laid fraud charges against Zuma, Ajay Gupta and others, based on allegations in former public protector Thuli Madonsela’s State of Capture report. EFF leader Julius Malema said he had not heard from the Hawks since laying the charges. When asked to clarify earlier in the week, Hawks spokesman Brig Hangwani Mulaudzi further confused matters, contradicting Ntlemeza and saying that the investigations were active. "Investigations are continuing and we therefore reserve our right not to give further details," he said. The FIC certificate does not provide any details on the transactions but simply flags them as suspicious. Oakbay argues in its affidavit that this does not amount to evidence and has asked the court to disregard it in its entirely.