Former Titans coach Rob Walter has urged the public not to expect too much too soon from emerging Proteas fast bowler Lungi Ngidi. Walter‚ who gave Ngidi his franchise break over a year ago at the Titans‚ told Business Day the promising 20-year-old‚ who has claimed six wickets from two T20 international matches‚ may not deliver on his undoubted potential if he is put under undue pressure at this early stage of his career. He said Ngidi should be allowed to develop properly and learn at international level. Ngidi impressed with figures of 2/12 on his debut in the first T20 against Sri Lanka on Friday at SuperSport Park, followed with a sensational return of 4/19 two days later at Wanderers. As a result of his performances‚ he was included in SA’s squad for the first three ODIs against Sri Lanka, which start in Port Elizabeth on Saturday. "It’s fair to say he has already shown he has the attributes and ability to play at the top level and be successful‚" Walter said from New Zealand‚ where he is the coach of the Otago Volts. "But we must be very careful not to create too much expectation too quickly. It is a standard error of sports lovers to seek immediate success and heroism from athletes. "We talk and write about it and this creates unnecessary expectation," he said. "Kagiso Rabada’s rise at international level has been unbelievable and there is no doubt he will become a great player‚ but he is the exception rather than the norm. "My concern is that we now think Lungi must achieve the same heroics immediately. "He may well do so after a great start but we too quickly forget those great days after a few average performances‚ which is inevitable at international level." Walter said he was confident Ngidi would grow to play for the Proteas in all formats and make a name for himself. "There is no doubt in my mind that Lungi can play all formats for the Proteas and go on to be someone that young bowlers will look up to in the future. "But let’s not make the mistake of putting undue pressure on him through continuous expectation of performance. "Let’s accept and celebrate both great and average performances while he develops his experience and game awareness," Walter said. "If we can do that then there really is no limit to what he may achieve," he added. From a technical point of view‚ Walter said Ngidi must develop physical resilience to the rigorous requirements of bowling at international level. He said he must also develop his game awareness and improve the consistency of his bowling action. "As far as his personal attributes go‚ he is tall‚ very athletic and explosive‚ which is a combination that will ultimately allow him to generate pace and bounce‚ which are critical to being a successful fast bowler," said Walter. "I was also impressed by his humility‚ willingness to learn and drive to improve," he said. TMG Digital