Traditional white business must become more open to discuss transformation at a deeper level, outgoing Business Unity SA CEO Khanyisile Kweyama said on Wednesday. Transformation has been hogging the limelight in the past few weeks with President Jacob Zuma calling for more radical economic change. Kweyama said talks had to delve into "enterprise development, ensuring the whole value chain is empowered, including management and changing the face of leadership — all these have to be part and parcel of the conversation". Kweyama, who intends to pursue business interests in mining and agriculture following a two-year stint as Busa CEO, said the will to transform often fizzled out once an equity sale had been wrapped up. Conversations about transformation had to reach "beyond just employment level at a holding company level for example", she said. Kweyama said Zuma’s comments at the ANC policy workshop in Gauteng last week should not "be viewed as creating instability. I think there’s scope for participation." For example, less than 20% of construction companies overall are owned by black people and less than 5% of large construction companies generating revenues greater than R35m annually are in black hands. Black executives in the construction industry also constituted less than 40%. "Part of the reason achievements are not made as speedily is because it takes a lot of energy and effort to talk about one area. We call on white and black business to be creative," she said. "In order for black people to thrive there has to be a bigger shift in the economy, in spending patterns … so you cannot say I’m promoting black business without ensuring that everything else is in place." Transformation has been a difficult topic for Busa. The Black Management Forum (BMF) broke away from a newly constituted Busa in 2011, accusing the organisation of not representing black interests. The forum played an active role in the appointment of two former black Busa executives. The BMF breakaway led to the rise of the Black Business Council. Kweyama, a former executive director of Anglo American SA, said: "The challenge is that Busa has such a diverse membership base in the interests of business and in the interests of the economy." But while business and the government fixated on the transformation agenda, "business is neither yellow, green, purple, black or blue" and foreign business was less concerned about transformation. "When you engage with a business in China [for example] it… looks at the broader business environment and then ensures that transformation has taken place," she said.