I have taken to watching Prophet TB Joshua on Emmanuel TV because at least I can see new faces having demons cast out, instead of watching the same faces on DStv’s obsessively repeated content. DStv claim they regularly purchase "exciting new content", but their lineup speaks otherwise, reflecting the bargain bin of what is available worldwide — 20 films for the price of two if Nicolas Cage or Vin Diesel appear in them all. So it is Emmanuel TV for me. In the latest session, broadcast from his soul palace in Lagos, Prophet Joshua ordered a woman to "release those demons!" as she howled them out, a little too lengthily even for his liking. He gave her the two-second frown — that subtle but highly effective "shut up now" code that we have all used. The woman’s wailing was interfering with the prophet’s instruction to get healed and purchase a bottle of holy water and a prayer bracelet. That was when I realised that I feel just like this woman when watching DStv. I howl incessantly at my hopelessness in allowing this entity to gain access to my mind. Worse still, it has induced amnesia. I firmly believe that DStv has researched precisely how long it takes the human brain to forget what it has seen before, and, bingo, on cue they dust off the old reels and air them once again. At first you think it is déjà vu, but no, it is just repeat content. MultiChoice’s response on their website is that "repeats are part of pay-TV services around the world. They are there so customers can catch up on the programmes they might have missed." If you happen to have missed any of the programmes you must have been absent from this planet for a decade, on the pilot trip to Mars. In an article, "You complained about DStv repeats and they answered" on Channel24, MultiChoice general manager Aletta Alberts responds to what she calls "the flurry of complaints from DStv subscribers regarding repeats". She says when they discuss the complaints about repeats with their suppliers, they explain repeats occur worldwide, but that they "haven’t seen a market that’s this engaged in the detail, and really as vocal anywhere in the world". If this constitutes a reply, please pass me the holy water. Alberts adds: "We’ve done channel reviews, we’ve done audits on the content and we’re in the process of addressing all these issues." Good god woman, don’t waste any more time on channel reviews and audits, just watch your very own DStv and write down the litany of repeats, including Kelly’s Heroes and The Horse Whisperer — to name but two. I’m starting to feel like I am The Revenant: a big bear has mauled me and I’ve clawed my way back to life, looking for truth and intelligence. But it is not to be found on DStv. Does DStv make a point of aiming at the lowest common denominator? The moment any programme has worthwhile content, such as the educational channel ED, it is whipped off. So why do people carry on subscribing? "It’s for the sport" some reply, attempting to justify their whopping monthly subscription fee. I know a lot of people are keen on cooking. I’m not averse to the odd platter either, but come on, next thing we will have that perpetually livid Gordon Ramsay ordering vendors who are braaiing mielies to redesign their braziers and pimp their corn. I think Ramsay watches DStv and that is why he is so angry. He needs to visit Prophet Joshua and exorcise those demons. Chances are good he will be getting the frown alongside the howling woman, unless the prophet’s aides firmly instruct him that only so many seconds of howling make for good TV. The cameras tire of perpetual exorcism and quickly move on. Alberts has promised "there’s a lot of exciting stuff happening. It’s not like repeats will go away but in general we are improving our product dramatically, and there’s a lot of new and exciting stuff that we’re very excited about. In 2017 there’s more exciting things coming in the first four months after our budget’s been approved." US President Donald Trump also uses the word "exciting" a lot. But there is always a rider. So, Alberts promises new life after the budget has been approved, but a rider is that film and TV studios only produce a limited number of shows. DStv’s website explains: "For example, Hollywood pushes out only 600 new films — or about 1,200 hours’ worth of viewing — a year; while a single movie channel is made up of 8,760 hours over the same time frame. The difference is then made up of repeats to fill up the channel." Tell me about it! But what about all the incredible content being made in every other part of the world? Can’t they add it to the trolley? Clearly not. Which leaves me no option other than to grab my holy water and prayer bracelet, and board the one-way junket to Mars. • Dugmore is a freelance writer based on a remote farm, where she is starved of entertainment.