Libreville — Burkina Faso and Cameroon booked semifinal berths at the Africa Nations Cup on Saturday as another page was ripped out of the form book when the latest favourites for the tournament were eliminated. Sadio Mane, one of the star attractions in Gabon, was the only player to miss in a shootout as Cameroon knocked out heavily fancied Senegal in Franceville, just hours after Burkina Faso struck late to eliminate Tunisia 2-0. A distraught Mane, who had been outstanding throughout the two hours of action, had to be helped off the pitch by his teammates after his side were edged 5-4 on spot kicks following a goalless draw. After the first four players from each side had found the target, Mane took Senegal’s fifth kick but the Liverpool forward’s effort was saved by young keeper Fabrice Ondoa and Vincent Aboubakar slotted home to win the game for Cameroon. The Indomitable Lions had been given little chance in Gabon after their squad was overhauled in the months prior to the tournament and eight players then opted to stay behind with their clubs rather than travel to the Nations Cup. "It’s an incredible win to beat Senegal, who were favourites and made it a difficult match for us," centreback Michael Ngadeu-Ngadjui said. "For most of us, it’s our first Nations Cup and none of us could imagine we’d still be here. Now we have a chance to write our own piece of history." Senegal’s early departure follows those of holders Ivory Coast and equally fancied Algeria, leaving the outcome of the three-week tournament wide open. "Senegal is sad again but life goes on," said coach Aliou Cisse, who captained the side when Cameroon beat them on penalties in the 2002 final after he, like Mane, missed the fifth kick of the shootout. "It’s not easy in the dressing room. We regret we weren’t able to live up to our potential." Cameroon will stay in Franceville for Thursday’s semifinal against Ghana who beat the Democratic Republic of the Congo 2-1 on Sunday with goals from brothers Jordan and Andre Ayew. Paul-Jose Mpoku scored for the DR Congo. Burkina Faso await the winner of the last quarterfinal between Egypt and Morocco in Port-Gentil in Wednesday’s first semifinal in the capital. Aristide Bance was the hero for the Stallions after he came on as a 76th minute substitute and thrashed home a free kick four minutes later to give Burkina Faso the lead over Tunisia. A breakaway goal four minutes later from Prejuce Nakoulma settled the tie as Burkina seek to revive their run to the 2013 final. Reuters