Springbok coach Allister Coetzee is likely to be axed by SA Rugby in the new year, but the blame for the team’s poor performances in the past two years do not lie squarely on his shoulders, says former World Cup winner Joel Stransky. The Boks have been victorious in just 11 of their 25 Tests under Coetzee, a win ratio of 44% that is well below the 65% the country has maintained in its 126-year history of playing international rugby. The team also set a number of unwanted records including a 57-0 loss to New Zealand and a first defeat to Italy. Local media have reported that Coetzee is a "dead man walking" and his exit is now a matter of process, with newly appointed director of rugby Rassie Erasmus set to head an interim coaching team. "I don’t think Allister has covered himself in glory and results have been poor," Stransky said. "But I also don’t think we can look at him in isolation. There are too many provincial unions … and the local coaching structures are poor. "The system has failed Allister and while we probably do need to make a change in terms of the current coaching team, we also need to put in place long-term measures. "We have too many professional players and the money is spread too thin. We should be able to pay better salaries to keep our best players in SA. "Everybody is pointing a finger at poor Allister, but for me, the system is more at fault." Robbie Kempson, who won 37 caps for the Boks at prop and is now a TV pundit, agrees change is necessary and adds the team would benefit from a coach from outside the South African game. "There is not a shadow of doubt they [SA Rugby] should be looking at other options," Kempson said. "It’s unfortunate for Allister, but it’s time for him to move on. "I think they should go for someone from outside, [New Zealanders] Robbie Deans and John Mitchell are two that come to mind. "Why wouldn’t they go for people who have proven expertise of putting teams into position where they can win Test matches?" Kempson said. "But I don’t think it will happen in my lifetime, the South African way of thinking is that they wouldn’t look outside of their square box." Coetzee has vowed to battle on to the 2019 World Cup in Japan and SA Rugby has refused to be drawn into discussions about his future. "A number of meetings and reviews are in progress on all national teams after which plans for all teams in 2018 will be confirmed," SA Rugby said. Reuters