In a setback to the South African Post Office’s hopes for a major role in the distribution of social grants, the Constitutional Court has directed its expert panel to meet the Reserve Bank and the Treasury to study the use of the National Payment System for the payment of social grants. The court issued a directive on Wednesday in a process that appears designed to keep a tight rein on the minister of social development and the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa). The court wants reasons why the grant distribution alternatives outlined by the panel in its second report submitted on November 16 are not feasible. The key aspect of the panel’s alternatives is a system in which most grants will be paid through ATMs linked to the National Payment System. If Sassa and the minister accept it is feasible, they must report to the court by January 15 on how they intend to set up a system of direct payments into beneficiary bank accounts from Sassa’s corporate bank account that could be ready by April 1 2018. In its second report, the panel noted that about 43% of beneficiaries had bank accounts, although "not all beneficiaries necessarily use these bank accounts to receive their social grant payments". The panel recommended that Sassa make payments into these bank accounts and, where feasible, require other beneficiaries to open low-cost bank accounts that Sassa could subsidise. Beneficiaries would then have access to ATMs or point-of-sales devices to access their grants at the bank of their choice or at their preferred merchants. Postbank is mentioned as one of the bank options. "The benefit of such a solution is that it would make use of an existing high-quality, properly regulated [National Payment System] structure, with significant cost savings, as well as having benefits in respect of financial inclusion of social grant beneficiaries," the panel said. The panel urged Sassa to encourage or even require beneficiaries living within 5km of an ATM or point-of-sales device to open a bank account to enable them to access grants. An estimated 20% of the beneficiaries would fall outside this 5km. For them, "a possible solution is more complicated", the panel acknowledged. The current arrangement might have to be continued for them until a more cost-effective solution is found. "The lack of current research into alternative payment methods in remote locations is due largely to Sassa’s failure to fulfil its mandate and to perform its functions timeously," it said. The Banking Association SA has said the industry is committed to helping find a solution to the grant distribution challenge "in the national interest and [we] will not seek to profit from our involvement". The court has also asked the panel to determine whether the Treasury should investigate the conduct of Sassa employees and department officials and to decide whether anyone should be prosecuted. crottya@businesslive.co.za