Singapore — Oil markets edged up on Tuesday as the Forties pipeline outage in the North Sea and voluntary production restraint led by Opec supported crude, although soaring output in the US put a cap on gains. US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures were at $57.30 a barrel at 3.19am GMT, up 14c from their last settlement. Brent crude futures, the international benchmark for oil prices, were at $63.49 a barrel, up 8c. There has been very little price movement in recent trading, with Brent moving within a $63-$63.91 a barrel price range since last Friday. Some upward pressure was taken off Brent after a nationwide oil worker strike was called off in Nigeria, traders said. Despite this, crude has been generally supported by the Forties pipeline system outage in the North Sea, which provides crude underpinning Brent futures. "The Forties pipeline closure will continue to put a floor under Brent crude," said Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst at futures brokerage Oanda in Singapore. Further price support has been coming from voluntary supply cuts by oil cartel Opec and a group of non-Opec producers including Russia. As a result of the production restraint and disruptions, oil inventories are falling globally. "OECD [Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development] industry inventories declined by 40-million barrels in October to 2.92-billion barrels while global inventories decreased by 61-million barrels to 5.48-billion barrels. This clearly indicates that the market in [the fourth quarter of 1017] is in material [1-million barrels a day] supply deficit," said researchers at Bernstein Energy. "Global inventories now stand at less than 56 days [of demand], which is in line with the long-term average.… With Opec’s decision to extend cuts, we expect that OECD inventories will reach the five-year trailing average [2.83-billion barrels] by [the third quarter of 2018] and long-term average [2.7-billion barrels] by year-end 2018," Bernstein added. Threatening to undermine the Opec-led efforts to tighten markets is US crude production, which has soared by 16% since mid-2016 to 9.8-million barrels a day. This means US output is fast approaching that of top producers Russia and Saudi Arabia, which are currently pumping around 11-million and 10-million barrels a day respectively. US shale production alone, which excludes large offshore facilities in the Gulf of Mexico, was expected to rise by 94,000 barrels a day in January, marking a 13th consecutive month of increases, the US Energy Information Administration said late on Monday. Overall, the EIA said it expected US production to hit a record 10.02-million barrels a day in 2018, on par with Saudi Arabia and not far off top producer Russia, which pumps about 11-million barrels a day. Reuters