The new national executive committee is set to play a decisive role in ANC politics following the election of a leadership split down the middle. Shortly after the top six officials of the ANC were announced, nominations for the 80 national executive committee (NEC) members were tabled in the plenary session. Delegates will vote for a new NEC, as the previous one was dissolved before the new top officials were announced. The ANC therefore does not have an NEC. The nominations indicated that police minister and former NEC member Fikile Mbalula received the most nominations from the branches. He was followed by Ronald Lamola, who was deputy president of the ANC Youth League when Julius Malema was heading it. Joel Netshitenzhe, Ayanda Dlodlo, Malusi Gigaba, Baleka Mbete and Zweli Mkhize are all on the top end of the nominations list released on Monday evening. Nkosazana Dlamini–Zuma also accepted nomination, as did Carl Niehaus, who acted as her informal spokesman during the presidential campaign. Former finance minister Pravin Gordhan and former party spokesman Zizi Kodwa also accepted their nominations. Rob Davies, formerly an NEC member has declined nomination, as has Lynne Brown, the minister of public enterprises. David Makhura, deputy chairman of Gauteng, and Stan Matabatha, chairman of Limpopo, both declined nomination. Makhura is positioned to take over the leadership of Gauteng now that Paul Mashatile has moved up the ladder as treasurer-general. Other names on the ballot include Blade Nzimande, Lindiwe Zulu, Bathabile Dlamini, Bheki Cele, Derek Hanekom, Mcebisi Jonas, Jackson Mthembu, Angie Motshekga, Faith Muthambi, Mondli Gungubele, Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams, Nomvula Mokonyane, Nkenke Kekana, Tony Yengeni, Nhlanhla Nene, Siphiwe Nyanda, Panyaza Lesufi, Thabang Makwetla, Tito Mboweni, Des van Rooyen, Ngoako Ramathlodi, Mduduzi Manana, Siyabonga Cwele, Buti Manamela and Kebby Mphatsoe. Solly Mapaila, the South African Communist Party deputy general secretary, had not indicated if he had accepted nomination.