Bengaluru — Gold prices steadied above a four-month low on Monday, but lacked upward momentum as the expectation of higher interest rates in the US supported the dollar. Spot gold was nearly unchanged at $1,248.06/oz by 3.50am GMT, after hitting its lowest since July 26 at $1,243.71 on December 7. US gold futures were 0.1% higher at $1,250.20. The dollar was steady in early Asian trade, buoyed by stronger than expected US jobs data and the expectation of higher US interest rates. US employment data on Friday showed jobs increased in November, painting a portrait of a healthy economy that analysts say does not require the kind of fiscal stimulus that President Donald Trump is proposing, even though wage gains remain moderate. "Gold prices hovered around $1,250/oz as data in the US suggests the economy remains strong," ANZ analysts said in a note. "Expectations for a rate hike at this week’s FOMC [Federal open market committee] meeting weighed on investor appetite for gold," ANZ analysts said. The Federal Reserve is widely expected to raise benchmark interest rates at its two-day policy meeting starting on Tuesday, and provide outlook on further rate hikes next year. Higher US rates tend to boost the dollar and push bond yields up, putting pressure on greenback-denominated, non-yielding gold. The metal has dropped more than 2% so far this month, mainly pressured by a stronger dollar due to the expectation of higher rates and progress in tax reforms in the US. Republican US Senator Susan Collins, whose support was crucial in passing the Senate tax reform bill earlier this month, said on Sunday that she had not yet decided whether she would back the final measure negotiated by House and Senate leaders. Meanwhile, the US, Japan and South Korea would hold two days of missile tracking drills starting on Monday, Japan’s Maritime Self-Defence Force said, as tension rises in the region over North Korea’s fast-developing weapons programmes. Spot gold still targeted $1,239/oz, Reuters technicals analyst Wang Tao said. Hedge funds and money managers sharply reduced their net long positions in Comex gold and silver contracts in the week to December 5, US data showed on Friday. Meanwhile, silver was down 0.2% at $15.80/oz. Platinum edged up 0.1% to $888.80/oz, after touching its lowest since February 2016 last week, while palladium was 0.2% lower at $1,004.15. Reuters