Panic selling of Steinhoff International shares may resume on Thursday morning after the JSE decided not to halt trading in the shares. Steinhoff closed 61% lower at R17.61 on Wednesday with R5.4bn worth of shares traded. In Frankfurt, Steinhoff closed 62% lower at €1.14. The furniture retailer’s market capitalisation has lost two-thirds of its value this week, falling from R240.5bn on Friday to R76bn on Wednesday. "The JSE has considered all the facts and information at its disposal and has decided not to suspend the listing Steinhoff International or halt trading of its shares in the South African market, as at this stage there are no compelling reasons to do so. It should be noted that Steinhoff shares also continue to trade in Frankfurt," the local bourse said in a statement on Wednesday after the market closed. "Notwithstanding the company’s disclosures contained in its announcements, the JSE has requested the company and its sponsor for detail regarding ‘the accounting irregularities’ as a matter of urgency." According to Viceroy Research, Steinhoff’s accounting irregularities may be related to "at least two off-balance sheet, undisclosed related-party entities", namely Campion Capital and Southern View Finance. "Steinhoff has moved two loss-making and predatory consumer loan providers to off-balance sheet entities: JD Consumer Finance and Capfin," Viceroy Research said in a report. Steinhoff’s plunge on Wednesday contributed to the JSE’s all share index falling 1.64% to 58,010 points. A strong rebound by Japanese stocks on Thursday, with both the Topix and Nikkei 225 indices more than 1% up, may help the JSE halt its slide. It has declined 5.4% from its November 21 peak of 61,299 points. The Reserve Bank is scheduled to release the country’s gross foreign exchange reserves in November at 8am. A consensus from a poll done by Trading Economics found reserves are expected to have decreased slightly from October’s $48.9bn to about $48.8bn. Statistics SA is scheduled to release October’s mining production and sales report at 11.30am. Investec Economist Kamilla Kaplan forecasts mining production rebounded to 2.2% growth in October from September’s 0.9% contraction.