Civil-society organisations expressed their concern about draft state of emergency draft regulations on Wednesday. Right to Know (R2K), which advocates state transparency, urged the government to reveal details of the regulations, which it labelled "draconian". Business Day understands that the draft stemmed from a continuing initiative of the justice, crime prevention and security cluster, which began its work in 2016. While the Presidency has denied being behind the regulations, undertakings by cluster departments to release information on it have not been honoured. The draft regulations, which were first reported on by Rapport on Sunday and released to the public by R2K on Tuesday, detail guidelines for the conduct and powers of security and emergency personnel to restore peace and order during a state of emergency. The guidelines include use of force against individuals not adhering to instructions of members of the security service and the fining or imprisonment of individuals guilty of possessing, disseminating and distributing "disruptive statements". Security analysts have said that while the regulations are a common practice in any society, the outrage about them is due to a lack of trust in state institutions and politicians’ commitment to upholding the Constitution. Institute for Security Studies’ executive director Jakkie Cilliers said it was the function of the state’s security apparatus to ensure there was contingency planning. While reaction to the regulations was exaggerated, the concern expressed was nevertheless valid as the contents of the draft regulations seemed to be in clear violation of some constitutional requirements, Cilliers said. "I thought that the furore was overblown and it reflects more our distrust and the lack of confidence in anything around the Presidency…. We are all concerned about the extent of state capture of the security institutions," he said. Political analyst Somadoda Fikeni agreed that the nation had become wary, saying the current political environment was clouded by leaders who had not acted in the national interest when given power. "There are incidents which show people that even the criminal justice system, the security and intelligence [and] the law enforcement are being compromised and captured to a point of being abused for political reasons, disregarding issues of national interest. So people were wary of anything as was the case with the clamping down on the media, Fikeni said. The drafting of the regulations could have been necessitated by the #FeesMustFall student protests and other security threats as experienced elsewhere in the world, he said. His concern about the secrecy surrounding the process echoed that of R2K. mahlakoanat@businesslive.co.za