The ANC took a huge knock in Wednesday’s re-election of the Metsimaholo municipality in the Free State, courtesy of a strong performance by its ally, the South African Communist Party (SACP). This was the first time that the SACP contested the ANC under its own banner, which placed even more strain on the tripartite alliance. Although the final results were not yet available, election analyst Dawie Scholtz said the Metsimaholo municipality was set for another hung council. The re-election in all 21 wards in the municipality was necessitated by the collapse of a hung council made up of the DA, Freedom Front Plus and the Metsimaholo Civics Association, backed by the EFF. The coalition collapsed after the hung council failed to pass the 2017-18 budget on time. The municipality was put under administration and council was dissolved. The results are likely to open up another round of horse trading that could result in very complex permutations. Scholtz said on Thursday night that the ANC had received 34.6% of the votes, which was a 10 percentage point decrease from August 2016. He said the DA received 27.9% of the vote, while the EFF grew one percentage point to get 19.1% of the vote. The SACP in its first run won 8.7% support, cutting the ANC’s vote. Scholtz warned the final results could change, but were likely to be close to his calculations. He said the township voting pattern showed that the ANC received 45% of the vote, 17 percentage points fewer than in August 2016. The EFF won 25%, while the SACP took 12%. The DA grew two percentage points in the townships and won 8% of the vote, Scholtz said. The results showed that the SACP could have a "devastating impact" on the ANC should it break away from the alliance. He said the suburban voting pattern showed that the DA lost some of its support to the Freedom Front Plus, which grew by four percentage points and received 10% of the vote. The DA received 71% of the suburban vote, six points less than in August 2016. The ANC obtained 9%, while the EFF received 5% of the suburban vote. Scholtz said the ANC was "hyper vulnerable" in Gauteng in 2019, following the trends in the results in Metsimaholo. He said that if the township vote shifted 2%-5%, it would be fatal for the governing party. The ANC successfully defended all 16 wards it won in the 2016 municipal elections but lost significant support in most of these wards, with three wards losing more or less 25% of the vote, the declared wards showed. The ANC fell below 50% in most of the wards it retained. The DA held its five wards but lost support in four. In other coalition drama on Thursday, Nelson Mandela Bay mayor Athol Trollip and speaker Jonathan Lawack survived motions of no confidence against them brought by the Patriotic Alliance and the United Democratic Movement, thanks to support from the EFF. In Johannesburg, mayor Herman Mashaba and speaker Vasco da Gama survived a vote of no confidence brought by the ANC, also thanks to the EFF, which voted against the motion. mailovichc@businesslive.co.za