Ajay Gupta has denied a “malicious” claim that he was present at a meeting earlier in 2017 at which Public Enterprises Deputy Minister Dikobe Ben Martins was present. In an unsigned lawyer’s letter from Goitseone Pilane Attorneys sent to the parliamentary inquiry into state capture, Gupta has threatened to report the claims against the suspended head of legal and compliance at Eskom, Suzanne Daniels — who made the allegation under oath — to the police and speaker of Parliament Baleka Mbete. Criminal charges would be investigated against her. In November, Daniels told the committee that Gupta was present along with his associate Salim Essa, Duduzane Zuma and Martins at a meeting in Johannesburg on July 29 2017. She said matters related to former CEO Brian Molefe were allegedly discussed and the intention expressed was to contact to the deputy judge president to ensure that Molefe’s court hearing was held after December 2017. The letter by Gupta’s lawyers was read out at the committee meeting on Tuesday, following a letter from Martins, in which he also denied Daniels’s allegation. Attached to the letter was a copy of a page of Gupta’s passport indicating that he was in India between July 23 and July 31. Also attached was a screenshot from a You Tube video clip showing Gupta’s presence at a religious festival on July 29. “The claims made by Suzanne Daniels are clearly false,” the lawyer said, adding that they were harmful to Gupta “and the country”. A second unsigned lawyer’s letter sent on November 30 by Gani Mayet Attorneys on behalf of Gupta said he and the Gupta family had “been wrongfully implicated in wrongdoing directly or indirectly either individually or through family or business associations.” The letter referred to Daniels’ testimony and reiterated the contents of the first letter. The letter said these allegations highlighted the need for the inquiry to exercise “extreme caution” in sifting facts and testing allegations and the need to provide all persons who are implicated by the inquiry the opportunity to refute the allegations. From the evidence presented to the committee so far it was clear that Gupta and the Gupta family were potentially subject to adverse findings by the inquiry. References to alleged corrupt practices were routinely linked to “Gupta-related”, “Gupta-linked” or “Gupta connected”. “Surprisingly, despite a lapse of nearly six months during which adverse but false evidence concerning his [Gupta’s] conduct has mounted before the inquiry no invitation has been forthcoming from the inquiry for the production of information to clarify or refute the allegations,” read the letter from Goitseone Pilane Attorneys. Before this, Gupta had refrained from public statements about the inquiry or about matters before the court. “He has no recourse in law to protect his name and reputation because the proceedings are protected by parliamentary privilege.” It was noted in the letter that Gupta had not yet received an invitation by the committee to make a written submission to the inquiry, which did not suggest fair treatment and suggested that the motives of the inquiry were not fair and honest truth finding. “Mr Gupta denies wrongdoing in which he and his family are implicated.” The lawyer asked the committee to furnish Gupta and the Gupta family with a detailed list of questions within 10 working days of receipt of the letter so he could respond in writing. If Gupta or any member of his family were required to appear before the committee, they requested a detailed list of questions two weeks before the scheduled appearance. If the committee decided not to furnish a list of questions, then the lawyer’s letter asked it to inform Gupta about this and furnish reasons for its decision. ANC MP Zukile Luyenge said the committee had already stated its intention to call the three Gupta brothers. “We want them to be here,” he said, adding that they could not dictate to the committee how it would function. African Christian Democratic Party MP Steve Swart said it was not for Gupta or his lawyers to decide on what basis they would give evidence to the inquiry. There was no reason for the Guptas to be treated any differently from other witnesses. EFF MP Marshall Dlamini said the Guptas were not entitled to any special treatment. ANC MP Mondli Gungubele said the letters were merely an attempt to disrupt the committee and divert it from its work.