It is the final stretch to the ANC’s 54th national elective conference, which starts in Nasrec, Soweto, on Saturday. The conference is set to be the final showdown in the battle between Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa and Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma for the party’s top position. Voting for the president of the ANC will start on Sunday, the second day of the event. The ANC has been ironing out some last-minute issues. Branches that had been allowed to rerun their general meetings were given until Saturday to do so. These include 29 general meetings in four Free State regions. The High Court in Bloemfontein had ordered reruns of the 29 branch general meetings after ANC members raised issues. The Free State’s twice-delayed provincial elective conference got under way on Sunday and was expected to conclude on Monday. The ANC members who had initially interdicted the conference said they would approach the high court again if the event went ahead. The group has sent a lawyer’s letter of demand to the provincial executive. They want copies of signed attendance registers of every branch general meeting or biannual general meeting in the province during which delegates to the Free State provincial conference and national conference were nominated, as well as decisions taken at those meetings. Following a consolidation of branch nominations, the Free State threw its support behind Dlamini-Zuma and her slate ahead of the ANC conference. ANC presidential hopeful Mathews Phosa is also questioning irregularities in the handling of branch general meetings and nominations in his home province, Mpumalanga. The matter was lodged in the High Court in Pretoria late last week. Ronalo Malomane, Phosa’s campaign manager, submitted an affidavit to the court, along with six other people. They want the provincial general council declared unlawful, irregular and unconstitutional. It is unclear what effect these court challenges will have on the elective conference. Also expected this week is judgment in President Jacob Zuma’s judicial review application of the former public protector’s State of Capture report. Zuma’s lawyers have argued that former public protector Thuli Madonsela’s report should be set aside. The president had challenged the right of Madonsela to call for a judicial inquiry to investigate allegations detailed in the report, in which Zuma is implicated. The High Court in Pretoria said it would hand down judgment before the courts close for the year, which is at the end of this week. Energy Minister David Mahlobo is expected to release the integrated resource plan (IRP) this week, which clarifies the state’s nuclear plans. In his opening remarks at the Energy Indaba last week, Mahlobo told delegates that "by next week, we will give you the plan" in an apparent reference to the IRP. quintalg@businesslive.co.za