It will be lights out in eMalahleni Local Municipality this festive season after the council failed to reach a repayment agreement with Eskom for its power bill. The council, in the Nkangala District in Mpumalanga, owes the power utility R1.2bn, while the total debt owed to Eskom by other municipalities is R12.4bn. After months of negotiations and engagements, Eskom announced it would carry out scheduled power interruptions to the council, starting from Thursday December 14, and the power utility would serve formal notice this week on how the process would be conducted. The municipality encompasses Witbank, and the Nkangala District is home to the Duvha and Kendal power stations, as well as Kusile, which is under construction. The area is also known for coal production, with a number of mines operating in it. Makana Local Municipality in the Eastern Cape and Thaba Chweu Local Municipality in Mpumalanga are in talks with Eskom to avoid facing the same fate during the holidays. Eskom spokesman Khulu Phasiwe said on Monday its planned power interruptions in eMalahleni should not be confused with complete cutoffs. "We are switching off power for two hours in the morning and two hours in the afternoon … until they … pay and come to the [negotiating] table with agreements," said Phasiwe. Eskom had made concessions over the years, he said, citing the fact that the utility used to charge prime plus 5% interest on its debt owed but had slashed this to prime plus 2.5%, as well as extended its payment period from 15 days to 30 days. "It could have been any council. They [eMalahleni] owe Eskom and have not reached an agreement… There is a council which has had interruptions since October — Thaba Chweu. "Until they come forward, we will continue with the scheduled interruptions," he said. DA MP Kevin Mileham, who serves on Parliament’s portfolio committee on co-operative governance and traditional affairs, said on Monday he was not surprised about the latest development with eMalahleni. "This is the worst-performing municipality in this regard. They have not been forthcoming in their payment arrangement. The former municipal manager walked around with bodyguards and the mayor tried to purchase a new vehicle," he said. Mileham said Eskom should understand that much of the debt could not be reasonably recovered. "Municipalities will never be able to pay back a debt running beyond three years. To keep adding interest on interest on the debt owed is ludicrous," he said. Last week, the interministerial task team on the matter gave itself until December 15 to set up a panel to resolve the legal hurdles that continued to trip up indebted councils. magubanek@businesslive.co.za