Former top jockey, Johnny Geroudis, who won the 1995 Durban July on Teal, has a new role in racing. He is now a racehorse owner and has a runner at Tuesday’s meeting at Turffontein. Geroudis suffered an eye injury while on holiday in his home country of Greece in 2015 and — despite undergoing operations — was forced to hang up his saddle in June 2016. Nevertheless, the flamboyant 47-year-old still rides out for trainer Mike de Kock who has presumably persuaded him to join the ranks of owners. In Tuesday’s second race, Geroudis will be hoping for a good first run from his Kahal filly Poormanslady whom he owns in partnership with the champion trainer. The booking of Gavin Lerena for the three-year-old is an obvious plus factor. The opposition in this 1,400m contest includes Pinfanta who made a pleasing debut when fifth over 1,400m at the Vaal in November. This daughter of Captain Al is trained by Lucky Houdalakis who saddled a treble at the Vaal last Saturday. Although he will be disappointed with Shufoog’s no show in Saturday’s Southern Cross Stakes at Kenilworth, De Kock sends a team of 10 horses to the city track on Tuesday and has prospects of winning three of the 10 races. Anthony Delpech is back in action after a short illness and he partners the Aussie-bred filly Jazaalah in the eighth race over 1,000m. This daughter of More Than Ready hinted she is above average with a fluent maiden win and is likely to be well backed on her handicap debut. Polly Wolly Doodle, a six-year-old mare trained by Candice Dawson, may pose the main threat to Jazaalah. Another runner with an each-way shout is Gavin Lerena’s mount Moggie Brown. Lerena has got the nod to partner another De Kock import Hakeem in the 10th race leaving Delpech to ride the year-older Unrehearsed who has been sidelined since January. Sean Tarry’s runner Torre Del Oro will be one of the leading fancies as the Trippi gelding goes well for Piere Strydom who is bidding for his third success on the four-year-old. The pick of the remainder could be Boatswain. Young Callan Murray has five booked rides for De Kock and the pick of his quintet could be the unbeaten three-year-old Alwahsh whom he has partnered to two victories. Delpech rides Amazing Strike for Jessica Slack who will be disappointed that Smart Call failed to feature in Sunday’s Hong Kong Vase. It has been a disappointing overseas campaign for the 2016 Met winner. Amazing Strike is now six so may have to settle for a place in a race that includes some classy performers including Talktothestars, Trip To Heaven and Classify. It is surprising that apprentice Mpumelelo Mjoka has been booked for newcomer Anchor in preference to Murray in the third race. Anchor is a well-bred son of Fastnet Rock whereas Murray’s mount Tango Man has cut little ice in his three starts. Donavan Mansour has had a number of winners recently and he could take the first leg of the Pick 6 on Hatfield Square. This inmate of Alec Laird’s stable is overdue a third win.