The Eastern Cape provincial government "improperly diverted funds" amounting to R300m that were supposed to be spent on social infrastructure, to pay for president Nelson Mandela’s funeral, Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane has found. She told reporters in Pretoria on Monday that the money was in the custody of the Eastern Cape Development Corporation. On individual liability, she has recommended among other things that the provincial treasury of the Eastern Cape investigate the financial misconduct of then provincial treasury head Marion Mbina-Mthembu, and that appropriate steps are taken against her. Mkhwebane said Mbina-Mthembu instructed the corporation to make the payments. But Eastern Cape Premier Phumulo Masualle was cleared. It was found that R250,000 was paid into his personal account by the provincial treasury, but Mkhwebane said Masualle had requested that the transaction be reversed after he received the payment. The public protector said it was Mbina-Mthembu’s conduct that violated the Public Finance Management Act and Treasury regulations, which resulted in irregular expenditure. Her conduct was "improper and constitutes maladministration". She also said the municipal managers of Buffalo City metropolitan municipality, King Sabata Dalindyebo municipality, the OR Tambo District municipality and Nelson Mandela Bay metropolitan municipality should investigate the financial misconduct of officials of these municipalities with the assistance of the Treasury. "Millions of rand of public funds earmarked for service delivery and social infrastructure development were used for a state funeral because of a lack of co-ordinated planning and compliance with the legislation and other prescripts regulating procurement," she said. Mkhwebane said the finance minister should ask the president to issue a proclamation to allow the Special Investigating Unit to investigate the unlawful appropriation or expenditure of public money. She said the Special Investigating Unit should also look into the intentional or negligent loss of public money by organs of state with a view to instituting civil action for the recovery of the money. Mandela died on December 5 2013 and his state funeral took place on December 15 in Qunu in the Eastern Cape. Releasing the report on her probe, the public protector asked the minister of finance to establish a task team from all levels of government to develop a co-ordinated plan for future state funerals. mailovichc@businesslive.co.za