Former communications minister Yunus Carrim has hit back at Naspers and described as "bizarre" suggestions that Naspers CEO Koos Bekker was hands-off in MultiChoice’s vigorous campaign to change the government’s policy on television set encryption. Carrim’s comments have made Naspers’s attempts to distance itself from mounting controversy around MultiChoice’s payments to ANN7 and SABC almost impossible. After initially refusing to comment, Naspers, which owns 80% of MultiChoice, on Friday issued a statement referring to "persistent baiting of Naspers to intervene in the affairs of Multichoice". It claimed some of this baiting was designed to pressure Naspers into forcing Multichoice to take the Gupta-owned ANN7 television station off the air. The nature of MultiChoice’s satellite platform was to provide the largest number and the most diverse voices. "The public decides what to watch. Media freedom and diversity are values worth protecting in an open democracy." Naspers’s response failed to deal with the issue of the surprisingly large sum that was paid to ANN7 in exchange for carrying a news channel that had a small number of viewers. Corruption Watch has asked MultiChoice to account for its "unusual display of generosity". The nongovernmental organisation said on its website that in the absence of explanation for the R167m payment to the Guptas there were suggestions it was linked to former communications minister Faith Muthambi’s decision to push through a decision in favour of unencrypted set-top boxes, which favoured Multichoice. "In short, the suggestion is that MultiChoice made an unusually large payment to the Gupta company [which] in turn ‘persuaded’ the minister to support MultiChoice in getting its way on the choice of set-top boxes," said Corruption Watch. In its statement, Naspers said Bekker met Carrim once. "This meeting took place in Pretoria and was for the full duration also attended by minister Pravin Gordhan, whom we greatly respect. Minister Gordhan can attest to the content of the meeting and whether any Gupta-related or any other illegal matter was discussed." On Friday, Carrim said: "Mr Bekker conveniently forgets the meeting we had in Cape Town within a month of my appointment, which he requested and MultiChoice [CEO] Imtiaz Patel several times urged. "Bekker’s main purpose was to persuade me about the folly of set-top box encryption and seemed irritated that I would not agree with him." Carrim said he did not believe ANN7 should be removed from MultiChoice’s platform. Attempts to link his comments to those calling for the removal of ANN7 from DStv were disingenuous. The Competition Commission is also keen to look into the deal between MultiChoice and the SABC. In November, the Constitutional Court heard argument from the commission about access to documents dealing with the transaction.