The killings in Inchanga have stopped but an uneasy truce remains, illustrating attempts by the ANC and the SACP to co-exist and work together, despite a recent fall-out. It does not help that the ANC and SACP in KwaZulu-Natal now find themselves largely on opposing sides of the ANC’s succession race. About this time a year ago Inchanga — a small peri-urban enclave about 50km west of Durban — was in the midst of an unlikely, but bloody, conflict between supporters of the two alliance partners. The casualties of this conflict vary, depending of who you talk to. Some put the number as high as 25, while others, including authorities, say the number is no more than 15 dead bodies and several injuries. The killings and attacks started in about January 2016 and peaked towards the 2016 local government elections, in which the SACP fielded, and won, against seated ANC councillors. The election outcome triggered fresh fighting, and some tit-for-tat killings, despite the deployment of extra security officers. The violence in Inchanga played a key role in persuading premier Willies Mchunu to appoint the Moerane commission of inquiry into political violence across the entire province, dating back to 2011. Chairperson of the SACP in KwaZulu-Natal James Nxumalo — who hails from Inchanga — told the commission in November that the main cause of violence in Inchanga was gatekeeping and the denial of ANC members of their right to choose councillor candidates of their choice. Over time the violence cooled, although tension remains. ANC and SACP members frequently heckle one another on public forums. On Tuesday, when SACP provincial secretary Themba Mthembu addressed the ANC’s provincial general council, he was heckled by supporters of Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma. The SACP is officially backing Cyril Ramaphosa. Malombo Nxumalo, the local councilor who won on the SACP ticket, says his former ANC comrades still harbour enmity against him. Nxumalo is also the cousin of James Nxumalo, the SACP KwaZulu-Natal chairperson and former eThekwini municipality mayor. He feared that his life was in danger and used to walk around with a phalanx of bodyguards. But their number has since been reduced, thanks to relative peace in Inchanga. However, his gripes have not ended. "Even now, more than a year after the elections, I am still not allowed to use the offices that were used by the previous councilor. They say it is an ANC office. "In council the ANC-led eThekwini Municipality is extending expanded public works programmes to other wards, but they have refused to extend these to us here in Inchanga. I guess they want to create the impression that I am failing as a councillor. But they will not succeed because I am in constant contact with the local people and they know that we are working hard to improve their lives," he says. Nxumalo says there have not been ongoing conciliation talks between the ANC and SACP. "I think the situation is largely peaceful due to the fact that police have arrested the kingpins behind the violence. One of the suspect is linked to no less than six murders." Councillor Vusimuzi Mbanjwa, of KwaNdengezi, west of Durban, echoed Nxumalo’s lament, saying he had also been denied resources that enabled him to operate effectively. He said he was intimidated and received death threats ahead of the elections but soldiered on and won against an ANC-imposed councillor. "After the elections the strategy changed. I was denied access to the office. But I asked my cousin, who runs an internet café, to allow me to use a small place in the corner to meet members of the community. They [community members] queue outside and tell my secretary what they want. "If the problem is too serious I have to come out and meet the member of the community. Sometimes I hold meetings in my car. It is very sad," Mbanjwa said. Mtheleli Sibisi, an SACP-backed candidate who stood against ANC candidate and comfortably won the 103 in KwaNyuswa, said he had to force his way to the councillor’s office after waiting for months on end to get permission from the municipality. "This is a very diverse ward and people have different needs and the communities have different priorities. In other areas, people need water and electricity as some of the areas are rural and underdeveloped and there are those who are in need of RDP houses. But the municipality has been prioritising areas under ANC councilors. This means that people are being punished for exercising their democratic right," he says. Tozi Mthethwa, spokesperson for the eThekwini Municipality, was not available for comment on Monday as her phone went to voicemail. But William Mapena, eThekwini municipality speaker, denies that the municipality is punishing independent councillors. He told journalists that all councillors whose requests remain unfulfilled had been furnished with the reasons behind the delays.