The third leg of the Volvo Ocean Race got under way mid-afternoon on Sunday from the V&A Waterfront with seven yachts of similar design and their world-class crews undertaking the 6,500 nautical mile voyage to the finish in Melbourne, Australia. Who will conquer what the forbidding southern ocean has in store is a conundrum best left to the fearless men and women involved in what is deemed the toughest sailing race in the world. This global event is staged every three years. On a hot, clear day with the famed Cape Doctor blowing at 25 knots to cool down the thousands of spectators gathered at Grainger Bay as a brisk start Brunel took an early lead but was soon overtaken by second-leg winner Mapfre. Dee Caffari of the UK is the skipper of Turn The Tide on Plastic and the only female skipper in the race. They have been a little off the pace due to problems over the first two legs after leaving Spain on October 22. In all, the yachts finishing will have sailed 45,000 nautical miles and visited 12 cities by the time the winner reaches the chequered flag in The Hague, Netherlands. For the past two weeks the crews have rested up in the Mother City while also attending to myriad tasks to ensure smooth passage come race day. All the hi-tech yachts are identical ensuring that no crew has an advantage over another… it is all down to sailing skills. Close racing is the order of the day and it comes down to who sets up their sails the best and skips making the right calls that will be the difference. Among the entrants are three-time past winners and Olympic gold medallists as well as America’s Cup winners and fearless young rookies – the teams have got them all. The Mapfre racing team from Spain won Stage Two — they were second in the first stage — and are keen for a repeat effort in a goal to take overall honours for the first time after they had finished fourth in 2014, says skipper Xabi Fernándes. "As a team, we have to let each member do their thing in the knowledge we are all working to the best of our abilities, to support each other, give encouragement and back ourselves as a crew. "We all know what we are doing. I must say we are stronger than we were in the previous edition, that makes us feel quietly confident about our chances," Fernándes said. "But for sure I say that without any whiff of arrogance. Our rivals are brilliant individuals all chasing a dream of conquering a mighty ocean that can end your journey in a heartbeat ... even when you’re on guard, with its hidden agenda, so we must just focus on ourselves and let things happen," he said. The Dongfeng Racing Team have inspirational Frenchman Charles Caudrelier as skipper. "Second to Mapfre to Cape Town after holding the lead in a tight tussle hurt us a bit but now for the next stage and we want to arrive in Australia ahead of them all is how I’ve been motivating my troops," he said. "It’s going to be a tough trip for the first week or so with the high pressure systems around, and then after that possibly a fast pace set and we must just be on our A-game from the get-go. "The Roaring Forties await, so too other challenges… pressure all the way." The Vesta 11th Hour Racing team, who won the first leg, closed out the podium in Cape Town and will want to consolidate their overall standings. "The race is difficult; long legs equals 24 hours on the job seven days a week. There’s no time for anything else than total focus and concentration. "That said, we’re all ready to go out and deliver our very best," said American skipper Charlie Enright.