Naspers’s discount to net asset value significantly increased in the week after management told investors in New York of plans to reverse this trend. The group’s shares lost 8.5% last week — their worst weekly performance of 2017. On Monday, the internet holding company’s stock shed a further 2.1% to close at R3,240, even as shares in 34%-held Tencent gained 1.3% in Hong Kong. Last Monday, Naspers’s management team said in a roadshow in New York that the stock’s discount — at close to 40% — was "not acceptable". The discount was largely the result of capital outflows from SA and the inability of local fund houses to fill the gap, partly because of Naspers’s heavy weighting in local indices. To deal with this issue, the group was working on bringing its e-commerce business to profitability and improving financial disclosures and shareholder engagements. It was also aiming to access "new pools of capital" through its American depositary receipt (ADR) programmes. "There has been very aggressive selling by one or two big funds that are unloading," said Herenya Capital Advisors trader Petri Redelinghuys. High-volume bids had been placed in the market for several weeks and it was possible a large institution was divesting of its JSE-listed Naspers shares so it could invest in the group’s London-traded ADRs. The share price was also pulling back after a strong run on solid Tencent and Naspers results and the announcement of plans for the ADR programme in London. "Since then, there’s been a brief sell-off in tech stocks in the US and around the world … and it’s been one-way traffic since," said Redelinghuys. Optimism around the outcome of the ANC’s elective conference may also have spurred rotations out of rand-hedge stocks including Naspers towards local banks and retailers, while the roadshow may also have contributed. "There could be a little bit of disappointment around there being no clear guidance as to how they are going to potentially restructure Naspers to get the value unlocked from Tencent," said Redelinghuys. Naspers said last week there were no immediate plans to buy back its shares and the group would also not unbundle its Tencent holding. Redelinghuys said Naspers was now "approaching the buy zone", along with the broader JSE Top 40 index. JP Morgan, which is overweight Naspers, said in a research note that Naspers’s rump assets were trading at multiyear lows, which reflected elevated index concentration, heightened competition for investor interest, historical earnings per share growth underperformance relative to Tencent and scope for pay disclosure enhancements. "We see material value unlock potential for the rump assets," it said. hedleyn@bdfm.co.za