Every tipster loves to try to find a long shot in a big race and Oh Susanna falls into that category in Saturday’s World Sports Betting Grade 1 Fillies Guineas at Kenilworth. The sponsors put up 40-1 about Justin Snaith’s filly, but that was soon snapped up and her price cut to 20-1. Even so, their price of 27-8 for the daughter of Street Cry to finish in the first four looks very attractive. Oh Susanna will once again have to overcome a wide draw, but that is something jockey Grant van Niekerk will have to deal with. Snaith will saddle the favourite Snowdance and this R2m daughter of Captain Al fully deserves her position at the top of the market following a decisive four-lengths win in the Western Cape Fillies Championship (Grade2) in October. Snowdance, the mount of Bernard Fayd’Herbe, also has the advantage of jumping from stall two in this 1,600m contest. Magic Wonderland — one of two runners from Candice Bass-Robinson’s stable — has also drawn favourably and could win the race. Although she is well held on the form book by Snowdance, the What A Winter filly was running on in the Fillies Championship and may appreciate Saturday’s extra 200m. Any runner from Dennis Drier’s stable warrants the closest scrutiny and the legendary KwaZulu-Natal trainer will be expecting an improved effort from Lady In Black, who never got in the hunt in the Fillies Championship. However, that was the Dynasty filly’s first outing since July. The chance of trainer Yvette Bremner’s raider Via Seattle has been boosted by Folk Dance’s win at Turffontein last Saturday and the filly is chasing her fifth win in eight starts. Mike de Kock’s Silvano filly Silver Thursday is 2kg worse off with Via Seattle compared to their clash at Turffontein so there is no reason why that form should not be confirmed. It is possible we have not yet seen the best of Love Supreme, who is chasing a hat-trick, but the swinger coupling the Snaith duo of Snowdance and Oh Susanna might be the best way to bet on the race. "Horse of the Year" Legal Eagle makes his second appearance of the season in the Grade2 Green Point Stakes and looks certain to be sent off favourite. It is possible Sean Tarry’s champion might not have matters all his own way as a trio of fancied runners from Brett Crawford’s stable is waiting to take him on. Edict Of Nantes showed he has gone the right way since his third in the Durban July with a gutsy win last time out and Piere Strydom is sure to get the best out of the Count Dubois colt once again. With stake earnings of more than R5m, Captain America has proved an outstanding buy at R500,000 and seems sure to be competitive in this field.