The EFF was not due to be part of an official coalition after the 2019 elections, DA leader Mmusi Maimane said on Wednesday. The coalition partners have begun to set their sights on the 2019 national elections. An official coalition of the DA, Congress of the People (COPE), Freedom Front Plus (FF Plus), the United Democratic Movement (UDM) and the African Christian Democratic Party (ACDP) was formed after the 2016 municipal elections, during which the ANC lost significant support. The EFF sits in the opposition benches and voted with the coalition in keeping the ANC out of power following the local government elections in 2016. The party has continued to give its support to coalition-led governments on an issue-to-issue basis. It was recently instrumental in keeping Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba and Nelson Mandela Bay mayor Athol Trollip in power by voting against two motions of no confidence. Maimane told journalists at a briefing in Johannesburg that it "is not a position they [EFF] want to take, and neither is it something that we advance". The EFF, which is the third-biggest party in the country, is set to play a crucial role in 2019, just as it has played kingmaker in smaller hung municipalities as well as in the Tshwane and Johannesburg metros. Maimane, together with FF Plus leader Pieter Groenewald, Cope leader Mosiuoa Lekota and ACDP leader Rev Kenneth Meshoe provided feedback on Wednesday on the state of the coalition after one year in office. UDM leader Bantu Holomisa was absent for personal reasons, said Maimane. Meanwhile, the Free State government has acknowledged receiving a letter from the DA requesting it to add more seats to the Metsimaholo municipality. Last week’s municipal election in the area failed to produce a clear winner, a situation that could again produce a coalition government. The re-elections were brought about by a collapse of the hung coalition which failed to pass its 2017-18 budget and was consequently put under administration and dissolved. One of the possible coalition options would be to give the EFF the executive seat in the municipality. But the EFF has been on record as saying it will never get into a coalition with the DA because of their divergent political ideologies. mailovichc@businesslive.co.za