In a recent report from Statistics SA, Whither a Demographic Dividend SA?, a vital question is posed: is SA heading towards a demographic dividend or a disaster? The report explains that SA has the potential to experience a demographic dividend as result of the fact that the working-age population, aged 15 to 64 years, is rising as a share of the country’s total population. SA’s working-age population ratio is peaking at about 65% of the total population, up from 57% in 1985. This should mean that the country has a higher proportion of its people in that age bracket who are involved in work and production. And a lower proportion — the very young and the elderly — who are dependent and require care. This demographic change should drive economic growth and improve public finances. The reality, though, is that SA’s very high rate of youth unemployment has all the hallmarks of a demographic disaster in the making, in which millions of young people find themselves living as dependants rather than being involved in productive activities. About 40% of SA’s 20-million young people between the ages of 15 and 34 are not in employment, education or training. The situation is worse for African and coloured youth, with unemployment rates well in excess of 50%. To turn this situation around, SA’s economic policies need to prioritise and focus on the youth. Its policies must be judged on the extent to which they create more employment and education opportunities for young people. SA should begin to do things differently to make sure it brings more young people into the mainstream of the economy. All planning and policy development activities must be viewed through a "youth lens". But how is this to be achieved? It is now well established that some form of experience in the labour market assists young people in securing future gainful employment. A young person who has never had a job or has experienced a prolonged period of unemployment has poor employment prospects. Based on this insight and understanding, an intervention agreed to between the government and business and supported by labour is under way to give unemployed youth between the ages of 18 and 30 an opportunity to gain work experience. The Youth Employment Service (Yes) plans to touch the lives of 1-million young South Africans over three years by providing them with paid one-year internships and learnerships in established firms. The technical work on establishing Yes is nearing completion and the programme should begin running in 2018. This will provide great opportunities to 1-million young people over three years. Another important intervention has been the employment tax incentive through which firms can claim tax benefits when they hire relatively low-paid young workers, aged between 18 and 29. The incentive has had a good take-up rate and the overall effect of the programme on unemployment, and youth unemployment in particular, is being assessed so that further improvements can be made. At a more fundamental level, SA requires a skills revolution to equip its young people with the know-how required to participate and compete successfully in the modern global economy and the unfolding Fourth Industrial Revolution, which is being driven by rapid advances in digital and other technologies. Young South Africans need to be trained in a range of emerging new disciplines, from computer sciences and biotechnology to nanotechnology, coding, robotics and artificial intelligence. Research chairs focused on these emerging 21st-century technologies should be established at higher education institutions to give the economy the skills and dynamism it needs to be competitive. For SA to prosper, it must lay the foundation for improving education outcomes by focusing on early childhood development programmes and on the nutrition of pregnant women. Only on a firm preschool foundation can the quality of basic education — not only a human right but also the gateway to equal opportunity — be radically improved. That is why the National Development Plan (NDP) articulates a vision for universal access to two years of early childhood development. However, the terrible weaknesses in basic education learning and teaching have to be tackled simultaneously and decisively. Democratic SA may have done well in expanding access to schooling by ensuring a high proportion of early enrolment of girls and boys, but it has failed to make commensurate progress in the delivery of quality education. Children experience textbook-delivery failures, inadequate school infrastructure and woefully poor results in international literacy and maths benchmark tests. By certain estimates, only about 40% of those who were in Grade 2 in 2005 passed matric in 2015. A new deal for children requires that specific targets are set to improve the education system and that these targets are pursued with an uncompromising focus. For example, the NDP recommends that learner retention rates of 90% are targeted. It further recommends that everything possible is done to rapidly increase the number of students achieving grades of more than 50% in literacy and mathematics. Significant investment is required in teacher training and teacher incentives and management. More investment is also required to improve school infrastructure to ensure that public school libraries, labs, sanitation and security are brought up to an acceptable standard, one that is conducive to a culture of excellence in learning and teaching. Good results are evident where this is being done through the efforts of various nongovernmental stakeholders working together with the government. Another national priority concerns ongoing interventions to improve how student access to higher education is financed. If we want to build a more equal society in SA, it is important that access to higher education should not be denied to those from low-income families. Thanks in part to the #FeesMustFall campaign over the past few years, serious weaknesses in systems have been revealed. No matter which mechanisms are put in place to support students in need, care must be taken to ensure the provision of quality higher education is sustainable. An effective higher education system is a key driver of research and development, which in turn is necessary to stimulate the kind of applied knowledge and technological development that is needed for solving society’s ills and expanding wider economic activity. Beyond the areas of employment creation and education, the NDP outlines a number of additional interventions that should be undertaken to assist and empower SA’s youth, including: • Community-based programmes to offer young people life skills training, entrepreneurship training and opportunities to participate in community development programmes; • Community safety centres to prevent crime and include young people in these initiatives; • A formalised graduate recruitment scheme for the public service to attract highly skilled people; and • An expanded role for state-owned companies in training artisans and technical professionals. It is not sufficient to merely include youth in plans. The economic development of young people must be at the centre of planning for employment creation, land reform, the development of small businesses and co-operatives and the reform of state-owned companies. The youth must also be a major factor when industrial, mining, tourism and information and computer technology policy is developed. It is only through a new deal that prioritises the inclusion of young people that SA will avoid a looming demographic disaster. What must inspire the country is the knowledge that if its vibrant and talented young people can be mobilised into economic activity, SA will begin to reap the bounty of a demographic dividend. The message is clear — there can be no new deal for SA unless there is a new deal for its youth and children. • Ramaphosa is deputy president of the ANC and SA.