Cabinet has received the final integrated resource plan and the proposed new appointments for the Eskom board, Communications Minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane said at a post-Cabinet media briefing on Thursday. She said Energy Minister David Mahlobo and Public Enterprises Minister Lynne Brown would make announcements on the decisions. The minister said Cabinet had approved the regulations on mediation rules in terms of the Protection of Investment Act. The regulations provide for investors who have a dispute over government action affecting their investments to request the Department of Trade and Industry to intervene with a possible mediation mechanism. Cabinet approved the framework for the establishment of a national broadband network company that will be formed out of the merger of Sentech and Broadband Infraco. Kubayi-Ngubane said this would facilitate the roll-out of the interdependent elements of the system in a co-ordinated manner and “create a national broadband champion”. Cabinet has adopted the Property Practitioners Bill, which will repeal the current Estate Agency Affairs Act. It creates an enabling regulatory environment to enhance economic activity within the real estate industry as well as addressing transformation in the sector. Also adopted was the National Qualifications Framework Amendment Bill, which introduces measures to deal with issues of misrepresentation and imposes consequences on individuals who misrepresent their qualifications or organisations that issue qualifications that are invalid. The International Crimes Bill was also adopted by Cabinet. Kubayi-Ngubane said it provided an improved legislative framework to deal with international crimes committed in SA and across the border. In recent year’s SA has drawn much flak over the perception that it has chosen leniency when faced with errant international leaders. This includes allowing Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir to leave SA despite being accused of crimes against humanity. Cabinet adopted the national tourism sector strategy, which is based on five strategic pillars — marketing, improving access for tourists, enhancing visitor experience, destination management and broad-based benefits. Brown’s spokesman, Colin Cruywagen, said the new Eskom board would be announced before the end of business tomorrow. With Khulekani Magubane