Several economic data releases are due out this week as the year draws to a close, with the South African Revenue Service’s (SARS’s) 2017 Tax Statistics Bulletin coming out on Tuesday, while on Thursday, the Reserve Bank will release its quarterly bulletin for the third quarter. Both are crucial sets of data that are instructive of how fiscal and monetary policy intersect. The bulletin will give a breakdown of the sources of SARS’s tax revenue, as well as areas in which collection may have declined or improved. The bulletin is a joint SARS and Treasury initiative. It is important because it gives a detailed account of revenue-collection trends across the board. The Reserve Bank’s bulletin will give an indication of how the current account performed. BNP Paribas economist Jeff Schultz expected the current account deficit to narrow to 1.8% of GDP in the third quarter, from a 2.4% shortfall of GDP in the second quarter, while First National Bank chief economist Mamello Matikinca forecast it would widen to 2.5% of GDP. "Our expectation is guided by growing dividend outflows in the quarter, as well as the terms of trade moving sideways," she said. Also scheduled for release on Tuesday are Statistics SA’s Quarterly Employment Statistics for the third quarter and the manufacturing figures for October. On Wednesday and Thursday, inflation figures for November are due out. The retail trade figures are also expected on Wednesday. Employment figures were projected to show a marginal increase in employment and earnings in light of stronger growth, said Matikinca. According to the latest reading of the Absa purchasing managers index (PMI), which measures sentiment in the manufacturing sector, there should be marginal growth. At the start of the month, Absa said while the PMI remained in contractionary territory, its fourth consecutive increase during the year had brought the index to its best level since May 2017. The PMI rose to 48.6 index points in November 2017, from 47.8 index points in October. The consumer price index (CPI) is expected to moderate further. NKC economist Elize Kruger expected CPI inflation to moderate to 4.7% year on year in November, from 4.8% year on year in October, which would mark the eighth consecutive month inflation has been below the 6% upper-target level. Underlying inflationary pressures were expected to remain subdued owing to weak domestic demand conditions and still well-contained unit labour costs, said Schultz. He forecast a moderation to 4.6% year on year. Matikinca cautioned there may be subdued growth in the retail sector as consumers probably deferred purchases in anticipation of Black Friday. menons@businesslive.co.za