Cristiano Ronaldo’s Real Madrid will continue their bid for a first European Cup treble in 40 years against Neymar’s Paris Saint-Germain after the big-spending duo were drawn together in a mouth-watering Champions League last-16 clash. Bidding for a hat-trick of titles in Europe’s elite club competition, Real paid a heavy price for not winning their group as they were drawn with the big-spending Parisians who were tipped as many people’s favourites ahead of Monday’s draw in Nyon. Five-time champions Barcelona will face English champions Chelsea, one of five Premier League clubs in the draw. Tottenham Hotspur, who topped their group ahead of Real Madrid, thanks to a 3-1 victory at Wembley, will face Serie A champions and last seasons’ runners-up Juventus. Manchester City, who clocked up a record 14th successive Premier League victory on Sunday, are listed as favourites after being handed a last-16 clash with Swiss club Basel. Five-time winners Bayern Munich, who finished below PSG in the group, will be happy with a two-legged clash with Turkish outsiders Besiktas. Europa League champions Manchester United take on Sevilla, while Liverpool will meet Porto. AS Roma’s reward for winning their group ahead of Chelsea is a tricky tie against Ukraine’s Shakhtar Donetsk. The Champions League has proved beyond even the vast riches available to PSG and last season they were stunned in the last 16 by Barcelona, losing the second leg 6-1 after beating the Spanish side 4-0 in Paris. A clash with Real is hardly what they would have desired at such an early stage, but with Neymar and Edinson Cavani having scored six goals apiece in the group, they will be hopeful — if they can keep Real’s nine-goal Ronaldo quiet. "This could have been the final, given the power of the two clubs. The last 16 is a bit early, we could say. Logically, we are both challengers for the trophy," Real director Emilio Butragueno said following the draw. "PSG get stronger and stronger. They had an impeccable group phase and have a lot of power. I don’t think it’s a good draw for them either. It will be a thrilling tie," he said. PSG and Real Madrid have played six times in Europe, most recently in the 2015-16 group stage when the sides drew 0-0 in Paris, with Real edging the return match 1-0. Chelsea and Barcelona will renew a regular Champions league rivalry that last surfaced in the 2012 semifinal when Chelsea won 3-2 on aggregate before going on to claim the trophy for the only time in their history. Barcelona won the 2009 semifinal on away goals. "We’ve had some great times at Stamford Bridge, haven’t we?" Barcelona’s Andres Iniesta said on Twitter. Antonio Conte’s Chelsea were handed a tough draw, but the other English qualifiers would have been reasonably content with their opponents, especially Manchester City. While Basel are a formidable side at home and have some big English scalps at home in the Champions League, Pep Guardiola’s side will be big favourites to progress. "We have to be careful, they deserve to be here," Manchester City’s technical director Txiki Begiristain said. Tottenham will face Juventus for the first time, while Manchester United and Sevilla have also never met before. Bayern Munich will meet Besiktas for the first time since winning 2-0 home and away in the 1997-98 group stage. "Bayern are a powerful team, but we are not a piece of cake either," Besiktas president Fikret Orman said. The first legs, with group winners PSG, Tottenham Hotspur, Liverpool, Manchester United, Roma, Manchester City, Barcelona and Besiktas away first, take place on February 13 and 14 and February 20 and 21 with the returns on March 6 and 7 and March 13 and 14. Reuters