London — The image of Selena Gomez, clutching a Coach bag, is everywhere right now. Tapestry has splashed out millions of dollars to sign up the singer and actress to be the face of the brand and launch a product range. She might have 130-million Instagram followers, but will she drive handbag sales? That is the question not just for Tapestry, but for the companies from Adidas to Asos, that are rushing to work with influencers as they chase the millennial dollar. Advertisers worldwide may have spent $570m on Instagram influencers in 2016, according to research firm eMarketer. That is still tiny compared to their overall digital spending, but it is set to keep growing. The problem for brands and investors is that it is hard to know if they are getting value for money. It is all down the digital drain unless they are selling products that their followers actually want to buy. Intermediaries such as rewardStyle can help. The platform enables influencers to receive a commission every time a retailer sells a product they have promoted on Instagram or Pinterest. Consequently, rewardStyle can track the sales that are generated by individual influencers, even down to specific posts. Companies can access this information — but that is another cost. At the other end of the spectrum are high-profile tie-ups driven by brands to ensure creative control and exclusivity. If this relationship involves, say, teaming up to produce a fashion line, or promoting a particular product, sales may be simpler to track. Take SuperGroup, a British clothing retailer. It recently drew heavily on content created by influencers, including short films and Instagram posts, to raise the profile of its winter jackets, a very specific type of product. The campaign drove an increase in sales of the category in the UK and Germany. But influencer marketing is also about creating a buzz about a brand and introduce it to new consumers — something that is crucial when digital shopping is possible for even the most expensive luxury goods. In the case of Coach and Selena Gomez, who is charged with speeding the label’s recovery in addition to marketing a special range of goods, there seems to be a clear pickup in social traction. The company said last month that a red Grace bag featured in its advertising had virtually sold out — but it remains to be seen if Gomez can lift broader sales in the crucial holiday season. Tribe Dynamics, a marketing technology company, estimates the monetary value of publicity generated for brands by third-party digital influencers, including individuals, publications, retailers and other brands. The majority of this Earned Media Value (EMV) comes from the amount of likes, shares and comments that their posts attract. This seems to be a pretty decent measure of the value created, but it does not always have a strong correlation with sales growth. That is because, ironically, influencer marketing is not just about influencers. Take Gucci, part of Kering, and Adidas, whose EMV has overtaken that of Nike. for the first time this year. Gucci has been a canny social media user, for example promoting its collaborations, including with artist Trouble Andrew (also known as GucciGhost). Adidas, meanwhile, has been moving away from sponsoring some football teams to working with individuals, such as footballer Paul Pogba, with more than 19-million Instagram followers. And of course, there is its tie-up with Kanye West. But their savvy use of social media helped to propel products that were already striking a chord with consumers, from Alessandro Michele’s embellished designs at Gucci to Adidas’s hot sneaker styles. Investors need to see a clear correlation between influencer campaigns and sales growth — or as clear as possible given the limitations that still exist — so they can judge whether companies are getting value for money from their marketing dollars. They also need to be aware that the hottest name can’t replace retail basics. So, they should not be distracted by the whizzy glamour of celebrity tie-ups. Influencers can have a zillion Instagram followers, but if the products they are hawking fall short, the brands paying for their endorsement will not see the sales come through. • This column does not necessarily reflect the opinion of Bloomberg LP and its owners. Felsted and He are Bloomberg Gadfly columnists. Bloomberg