DA leader Mmusi Maimane says South Africans have shown they are ready to reject the ANC, after the ruling party failed to unseat the mayors in Johannesburg and Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality. Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba on Thursday fended off a motion of no confidence brought by the ANC in his council‚ as did Nelson Mandela Bay mayor Athol Trollip. Mashaba won by 140 votes against 121. The victory was delivered by the support the DA received from the EFF on the night. Presenting the EFF argument‚ Musa Novela said Mashaba had done nothing but fight corruption. "The primary responsibility of the city or municipality is to give the people quality service delivery. "But we are compelled at the timing of this motion to ask the following question as the EFF. "The borrowing of money by the City of Johannesburg has it happened for the first time under the leadership of Herman Mashaba? We ask again‚ did the billing crisis begin under the leadership of Herman Mashaba? We ask again‚ is it for the first time that the City of Johannesburg has under-collected in terms of revenue? "The answer to these questions is a big no …There is an opportunistic element which is caused by denialism from those who have proposed this motion … Even the great Oliver Tambo is not going to save you today‚" said Novela. The ANC also lost its motion of no confidence in council speaker Vasco da Gama by 140 to 120. Maimane said of the results: "The failure of the motions of no confidence in Johannesburg and Nelson Mandela Bay show the strength of the coalition governments in those cities. Our coalitions in these metros have withstood the ANC’s efforts to unseat us‚" Maimane said. "Today we have shown the country the unity of purpose in liberating SA from the oppression of corruption and giving the country a fresh start with a new government." Maimane said the writing was on the wall for the ANC‚ which also saw its dominance diminished in a Free State by-election in the Metsimaholo municipality. "Along with the Metsimaholo by-election results‚ it is clear that the ANC is dead and the future of SA is only safe in the hands of the DA and opposition parties committed to fighting corruption and building a better country‚" he said.