Bodyweight training zoomed to the top-10 list of fitness trends for 2017. Expect it to stay there in 2018 and beyond. There’s no magic exercise bullet to keep you fit in body and mind. There are essential elements to training regimens that you overlook at your peril. Aerobic (with oxygen) training is one of them. It builds stamina and helps to keep cardiovascular disease at bay. Bodyweight training is another. The experts define it as the art and science of using your own body weight as resistance against gravity for a workout. They say it’s one of the best ways to build and maintain lean muscle. That keeps you fit and able to grow stronger as you grow older. Despite what medical prophets of doom always say, growing older and declining physical (and mental) strength are not constant companions. Bodyweight training has myriad benefits. Ask Sean Tangney, head coach and programming director of CrossFit ProForm in Johannesburg. US coach Greg Glassman developed CrossFit over decades. Its popularity has spread across the planet including in SA. CrossFit now enjoys a reputation as "arguably the most successful fitness entity ever". Tangney says bodyweight training is a key CrossFit element. Bodyweight exercises work multiple muscle groups at the same time. Compare that with isometric exercises, such as bicep curls, that work only one muscle group at a time. Bodyweight training builds more muscle mass. That’s one of the best ways to maintain a strong metabolism and prevent weight gain, he says. "Strength training helps to rebuild muscle wear and tear that develops as we age," Tangney says. Using your own weight to build strength is free, can be done anywhere and requires absolutely no equipment. That’s not always strictly true, of course. For every rule, there’s the exception to prove it. Some forms of bodyweight exercise may require a little outside aid. Like pull-ups, for which you need a hanging bar to lift yourself. In general, though, you can do many bodyweight exercises anywhere, anytime. They also allow you to adjust the exercise level easily according to your ability, Tangney says. "With the wide variety of bodyweight exercises available, you can easily get a full-body workout that uses multiple big muscle groups." He’s not understating the case about variety. The most well-known forms of bodyweight training are probably skipping, sit-ups, lunges, squats, pull-ups and push-ups. There are variations within in all forms. Squats can be "pistol". That’s a single-leg squat that the experts call a " unique exercise". They say it combines "strength, flexibility and grace in a manner unlike many other movements". Push-ups can be combined with handstands. Skipping can be single or "double unders". That’s when the skipping rope passes twice under your feet on every jump, Tangney says. There are also box or step jumps. You do these from a standing position in front of a secured box, platform or step. You jump onto the box, platform or step, immediately back down to the same position and repeat. Running up and down stairs achieves the same thing. Planking is another popular form of bodyweight training. You lie on the floor, straighten the body, rest on your forearms and tips of your toes, and maintain it rigidly, like a plank of wood. Hence the name. Another form of bodyweight exercise is the "burpee". And no, it has nothing to do with releasing pent-up gas from the digestive tract through the mouth. Dr Josh Axe is a US doctor of natural medicine and chiropractic and a physician for many professional athletes. On his Dr Axe website, he rates the burpee as possibly the "single best exercise ever". Burpees are basically "squat thrusts". They hit almost every muscle group while providing aerobic and endurance benefits, Axe says. Burpees also strengthen the elusive "core". That’s your midsection, which involves all your muscles in that area including front, back and sides. Axe adds the caveat that you need to be in good shape to begin the burpee. It is a "complex exercise" that can lead to injury for the unwary, he says. It is not an easy exercise to get right and incorporates four steps. Starting from a standing position drop into a squat position with hands on the ground; kick your feet back, placing your body into a plank position, while keeping arms extended; jump your feet back into the squat position; jump back up from the squat position. Tangney says bodyweight exercises have other benefits. They improve stress levels and prevent or alleviate depression. They also boost the immune system and cardiovascular health and improve the condition of bones and joints. In developing CrossFit training regimens, he combines bodyweight with another of my favourite activities, HIIT (high-intensity interval training). HIIT is a boon if, like me, you have a low boredom threshold for repetitive exercise. There’s nothing like doing the same number of repetitions or sets, over the same time duration or at a consistent level of intensity each time to put you off exercise altogether. Thus, Tangney includes constantly challenging HIIT in CrossFit training. It takes the benefits of bodyweight exercises to "the next level" in the shortest time. There are conditions for your workout to qualify as "high-intensity", though. He says you need to reach about 85% of your maximum heart rate during each interval. Above 85% of your maximum heart rate is called the "anaerobic threshold". That’s the point at which Tangney says your body experiences the "afterburn effect". You’ll burn calories long after the workout is over, he says. That’s how it maximises fat loss potential — as long as you pay attention to what you eat. Exercise is essential for overall health, wellness and vitality. But it isn’t the most effective weight-loss tool. For proof, you just have to look at the many overweight people who work out religiously at the gym daily. They never seem to lose any weight. As the experts will tell you, the calories-in, calories-out model of obesity really is wrong. Obesity is not just from eating too much and moving too little. And sages through the ages have always known that exercise is not just an external endeavour. Morihei Ueshiba, the founder of the Japanese martial art of aikido, had this to say: "The purpose of training is to tighten the slack, toughen the body and polish the spirit."