President Jacob Zuma, who was censured by a court for legal manoeuvring to delay having his day in court on allegations of corruption, money laundering and racketeering, has won yet another reprieve. His legal team has managed to get an extension from the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) head, Shaun Abrahams, to submit fresh representations on why he should not face 18 corruption charges. The president was originally given until November 30 to make the representations. His lawyers wrote to Abrahams on November 28, indicating that they would be unable to make the cut-off date and requesting an extension to February 19 2018. Abrahams has now given Zuma until January 31. DA federal council chairman James Selfe said his party was "not surprised by yet more delaying tactics" in the case. He queried whether Abrahams was able to grant such an extension after last week’s court judgment on the NPA head. Last week, a full bench of the High Court in Pretoria set aside Abrahams’s appointment as NPA boss and said Zuma had already told the Supreme Court of Appeal that he had every intention of using the processes available to him to resist prosecution. The court said this would place Abrahams on the spot. The court ordered that the deputy president should appoint a new national director of public prosecutions while Zuma was still in office because he [Zuma] had a conflict of interest. The NPA and Zuma have said they will appeal against the judgment. The DA, which has been fighting for eight years to have Zuma face corruption charges, has made representations to the NPA and requested that it be allowed to see the president’s submissions. However, in a letter to the DA’s legal team, Abrahams informed the party of the extension granted to Zuma. He quoted Zuma saying he needed the extension because his counsel was unavailable until mid-December because of prior commitments. Other reasons given were that the matter was complex and voluminous in nature; much had transpired since Zuma first made representations eight years ago and he needed time to comprehensively review matters; and the president, because of his duties, would be unavailable to consult with his legal team until after December 20. NPA spokesman Luvuyo Mfaku said Abrahams granted the extension in the interest of "fairness and justice", denying that this was unusual or that the president was given special treatment. The prosecution team, set up to consider Zuma’s representations under controversial KwaZulu-Natal director of public prosecutions Moipone Noko, was still reviewing evidence and indicated it would need until the end of January to complete this work. quintalg@businesslive.co.za