Cape Town is facing an unprecedented crisis. As of today, our dam levels stand at just 35%, compared with more than 50% at the same time in 2016. After three consecutive years of below-average rainfall, the city is experiencing the worst drought in its recorded history. As we head into another long, dry summer, there is a very real possibility that the taps could run dry. This has become known as Day Zero. At this point, when dam levels reach 13.5%, nearly all taps in the city will be turned off and residents will need to queue to collect drinking water at 200 collection sites across the city. To ensure that the city has every resource it needs to avoid this nightmare scenario, I have been forced to make a difficult decision. I am proposing to council on Tuesday that the city introduce a temporary drought charge as of February 1. Let me explain why. Over the past year, the city has been working overtime to secure new sources of water and to ensure that our existing supply of water goes further. This has included the refurbishment of boreholes and other infrastructure at the Atlantis-Silwerstroom Aquifer, drilling of abstraction boreholes into the Table Mountain Group Aquifer to supply the Steenbras catchment area, and the reintroduction of the Molteno Springs system into the city’s main water supply. These and other projects make up the water augmentation projects that are estimated will bring sufficient additional water on stream to avoid Day Zero. These additional water augmentation projects include desalination, groundwater abstraction and water recycling, which are in the advanced stages of planning. The city has also been working on an ambitious leak and water-loss reduction programme that has already brought water losses down to about 14%, which compares with the national average of 37%. We are now working to reduce this figure to between 5% and 10%, while also stepping up advanced pressure reduction, which has further limited daily consumption. This significant investment in water systems is costly but it will benefit the city now and for years to come. Many of the projects under way were part of an existing strategy aimed at climate risk mitigation, although the drought has accelerated this process and brought the implementation of these projects forward by several years. The city has also embarked on an ambitious demand-management programme. In September, level 5 water restrictions were introduced in response to below-average winter rainfall and critically low dam levels. The restrictions require all residential consumers to reduce daily consumption to 87 litres per person per day and all commercial properties to reduce their consumption by 20% compared with the previous year, or face heavy fines. These restrictions were supported with a public awareness campaign aimed at reducing daily water usage and by increased water tariffs designed to discourage high water usage. Since the restrictions were introduced, consumption has fallen by nearly half from about 1.1-billion litres per day before the drought to about 600-million litres a day. Although many residents have done well to reduce their water usage, the collective consumption target of 500-million litres a day as imposed by the national Department of Water and Sanitation, and required to avoid Day Zero, has yet to be achieved. A drastic reduction in demand is critical to managing the drought but it has also resulted in a drastic reduction in the city’s revenue. Based on consumption figures for October, the water service has calculated that the projected water budget will suffer a deficit of about R1.7bn for 2017-18. This deficit is likely to increase in the coming months as consumption is reduced further. Without this critical income, we will be unable to fund not only all of the proposed water-augmentation programmes but also the basic operations required to provide water and sanitation services to the people of Cape Town. For this reason, I am proposing a drought charge to help pay for these vital projects for 2018. The drought charge will be a temporary additional charge based on existing property valuations and will assist with the city’s budget shortfall. The funds will mainly be used for the day-to-day provision of drinking water and also to ensure that there is sufficient budget available to spend on emergency water augmentation projects if we need them. It must be emphasised that the drought charge is not intended to be punitive as it relates to residents’ water savings. But as the city has to continue its operations in service provision, the drought charge is necessary to ensure water supply for all residents, as acute water shortages will have dire implications for all residents and the domestic economy. If the drought charge is approved in the January 2018 adjustment budget, it will raise about R420m in the 2017-18 financial year and about R1bn per year for the next three years. A charge based on property valuations has been deemed the most progressive of the options, while being the most equitable and fair to poor households. For this reason, the drought charge will only be applied to residential properties with a valuation of R400,000 and above, and to all commercial properties with a valuation of R50,000 and above. We have tried to ensure that the charge won’t be much more than what residents’ and businesses’ water bills were before the drought. As an example, the proposed drought charge will work as follows: a residential property with a valuation of R800,000 could pay a drought charge of about R45 and for a property with a valuation of R1m, the proposed charge would be R60. The drought charge is expected to be in place only until the end of the 2020-21 financial year. During this period the water tariff structure will also be overhauled extensively. We agree with Western Cape premier Helen Zille that the national Department of Water and Sanitation is responsible for constructing and maintaining SA’s major storage dams and their related infrastructure, and that the national government should be responsible for the costs. At the same time, we cannot afford to wait any longer for further assistance. The city administration has already diverted a total of R473m away from other departments to fund the new water-augmentation projects and assist with their immediate operating needs, but it is not enough. The increased unpredictability and randomness of rainfall is a feature of climate change and one for which we need to prepare. Combating this drought requires a partnership with the city and its residents, whose help is vital to enable Cape Town to bring additional water supply online. The drought charge, along with your daily water savings, are part of that help. • De Lille is Cape Town mayor.