New allegations by President Jacob Zuma’s supporters that SA’s biggest banks are frustrating efforts to address racial inequality signal an escalation of a battle for control of the nation’s financial system, including the Treasury. Protestors from the ANC Youth League (ANCYL) invaded an Absa branch on January 26. Then, on Monday, the ANC’s top leaders said the four biggest lenders could not be allowed to continue dominating the industry. These banks have refused to do business with companies linked to the Gupta family, who are in business with Zuma’s son. The same day, Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan accused the Guptas of trying to undermine his ministry. He commented in court papers filed to rebut the family’s call for him to force banks to re-open accounts of businesses they control that the lenders closed last year because of allegedly suspicious transactions. The Guptas say there is no evidence to justify the closure. "Partly this is related to various factions within the ANC trying to pressure the banks politically in retaliation for the banks’ actions against the Guptas and their related entities last year," said Rowan Williams, director of Nitrogen Fund Managers, which has R1.4bn under management. The criticisms of the banks and Gordhan risk eroding confidence in the financial services industry, which is the largest in the R4.3-trillion economy, if property companies are included in the same category. Concern the banks may face increased political scrutiny are weighing on stocks. The banks index is down 4.5% this year, the most among the JSE’s major indices. The fight over the financial system is intensifying as Zuma prepares to step down as ANC leader in December. "The truth that stands revealed as the real plot is the systematic and highly organised campaign by the Gupta family and its associates against the National Treasury, myself and other targets," Gordhan said in the court papers. That charge was refuted by Oakbay Investments, a company controlled by the Guptas "The affidavit is a case of reverse victim syndrome. The applicant proactively came after us and smeared our name," the company said by e-mail. "We look forward to clearing our name in court." Zuma’s relationship with the Guptas, who he has described as his friends, has sparked a series of controversies over how much clout they wield in the government. The public protector implied in a report last year that Zuma allowed the Gupta family to influence Cabinet appointments and the awarding of state contracts. Zuma and the Guptas deny any wrongdoing. The Guptas have alleged that the lenders, including Standard Bank, Barclays Africa, FirstRand and Nedbank, colluded when they decided to close their accounts. The banks deny the accusation. The racial make-up of the banks’ leaders has made the industry a target for politicians. Of the five biggest lenders, which together control about 90% of the local banking market, only Standard Bank has a black co-CEO, and he has a white counterpart, while the rest are all headed by whites. The ANCYL, in a statement on January 18, accused the Reserve Bank of protecting lenders that they say use credit-risk assessments to prejudice young blacks by saddling them with high interest rates. Uncertainty over the financial system heightened in December 2015 when Zuma unexpectedly fired Nhlanhla Nene as finance minister and replaced him with a little known MP. That sent bank stocks into a tail spin when they lost about R155bn in value over two days, the most on record, and weakened the rand. Four days later, under pressure from ANC and business leaders, including bank CEOs, Zuma named Gordhan to the post. Since then Zuma and Gordhan have feuded over the management of state-owned companies and the affordability of a proposed nuclear power expansion. Gordhan has spearheaded SA’s efforts to keep its investment-grade rating and is seen by international investors as a steady hand to guide the economy. The Treasury’s pledge to keep spending under control and limit debt was cited as crucial for S&P Global Ratings and Fitch Ratings to avoid a cut to junk. Drawing the banks into the political arena could be risky for the country, said Patrice Rassou, head of equities at Sanlam Investment Management. "Bank bashing has become a popular sport and yet a sound financial system is key to ensure the economy remains on a firm footing," he said. Bloomberg