At the beginning of each year there is the usual round of predictions of political change and economic growth. This year is no exception, especially with the reality of Brexit, a Trump administration and the prospect of a Le Pen election in France. With regard to US President Donald Trump, many media pundits and academics are predicting a de-emphasis of US engagement in Africa. While it is too early to assess the accuracy of such predictions, it is likely Africa will have to generate its own economic growth and institutional structure and not rely upon development assistance, preferential trade deals and risk-mitigating instruments such as export credit guarantees and political risk insurance. Borrowing from the experience of East Asia, conventional wisdom dictates that regional integration is a proven means to accelerate similar homegrown economic growth in emerging markets and to integrate with global value chains, the dominant feature in global trade. In response to such trends, Africa has made an effort to integrate its varied and disparate regional economic communities so as to create uniformity and coherence. In so doing, it will be able to attract internal and external investment so as to scale businesses to more economic size. The leading attempt at integration is the tripartite agreement among the Southern African Development community, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa and the East Africa Community (EAC). It hopes to eventually result in a common external tariff among members by the end of the decade and a continental free trade agreement by 2025. But it has got to work somewhere first! At the recent World Economic Forum in Davos, Rwandan President Paul Kagame bemoaned the slow pace of regional integration. To better understand his commentary, we can examine the experience of the EAC in trade and investment integration. The commodities supercycle has come and gone, but sub-Saharan Africa has picked up appreciable economic steam since the 2008 recession, experiencing annual GDP growth rates of 5% and more than 10% in some economies. No region has seen more robust growth than East Africa. In fact, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and Tanzania are expected to experience 5.6%-7% GDP growth in 2017, a far cry from SA’s of just more than 1%. One must ask: why has East Africa outperformed other regions? One reason is history. The EAC was created in 2000 and grew from the former East Africa Union. Burundi and Rwanda acceded to the EAC after its creation. The EAC created a customs union and common market to address one of Africa’s economic quandaries: small market size and suffocating trade barriers. In the early years, and under the economic, if not political leadership of Kenya, crossborder investments resulted in transport infrastructure and in trade facilitation. With reference to the latter, in the mid-2000s, with donor assistance, the EAC initiated an ambitious array of measures that expedited trade, such as one-stop borders and common export documentation. As a result, according to the IMF, intraregional and intra-African trade grew to nearly 23% by the mid-2000s. Regrettably, that trade declined to 11% by 2016. According to a study just released by the IMF — A Work in Progress: Integrating Markets for Goods, Labour and Capital in the East Africa Community — while the average tariff rates have converged among EAC members to 12%-14%, further deductions have slowed. The emergence of nontariff measures has also sapped energy from regional integration initiatives. Tanzania has been a traditional opponent of open markets and remains a laggard to fulsome integration. Last, the political drama in Burundi, albeit a small economy, has possibly dampened the appetite of regional and foreign investors wishing to take advantage of this larger regional market of 200-million consumers. One bright spot in the above story on trade integration is the growth in the trade of finished (or final) goods among EAC members. Trade in these manufactured goods has steadily increased since the creation of the EAC. These final goods use local inputs and add value in terms of labour, capital and management know-how. The obvious source of these goods is relatively industrialised Kenya, and fear of that country’s economic dominance may have caused other EAC members to slow tariff reductions and introduce nontariff barriers in favour of national producers. However, such success may generate an anti-Kenya bias, which is common in many regional economic communities when one member is economically dominant. It has always been said that "capital is a coward". Africa is no exception to this rule. Capital outflows occur because investors seek higher and more secure returns on their investments, regardless of the geography. Africa must do more to keep its pool of capital invested locally, and to do that it needs to pay more than lip service to facilitating cross-border capital flows. And to do so it needs to achieve full commitment from national governments. On the national level, according to the IMF, Uganda and Kenya have reduced capital flow barriers at a much more ambitious level than fellow EAC member Tanzania and even SA. Although these regional capital flows have provided impressive results, the IMF has concluded that progress has stalled. Citing 2014 and 2016 EAC scorecards, the IMF observed "the overall progress to eliminate restrictions on the free movement of capital has been sluggish". It appears that Tanzania maintains a very protectionist regime, thereby thwarting the ambitions of more ambitious EAC reformers. • Carroll is a senior associate at the Centre for Strategic and International Studies in the US and vice-president at Manchester Trade. Benn is a CSIS researcher