Ajax Cape Town are seeking a postponement of Saturday’s Premier Soccer League clash with top-of-the-table Kaizer Chiefs because of concerns over safety‚ club chairman Ari Efstathiou said on Tuesday. With the Cape Town Stadium unavailable and the Premier Soccer League (PSL) refusing to allow the game to be moved to Moses Mabhida Stadium‚ Ajax is left only with Athlone Stadium for the night match. But the club is concerned the 21‚5000 capacity venue will be too small and lives could be in danger if the game goes ahead. Police and traffic officials have concluded at two meetings it would be unsafe to go ahead with the match but a letter from the Western Cape police to that effect had yet to be written. PSL officials are refusing to grant a postponement unless the police service officially states in writing it believes going ahead with the game is dangerous. The Cape Town Stadium is unavailable because of a music festival but Chiefs’ past two visits to the venue have seen crowds averaging 35,000. "But for Athlone we can only have 21,500 spectators and with complimentary tickets and other sundries it means we can only sell 17,800 to the public‚" Efstathiou said. "This is problematic because this is a high-demand fixture. We need to add that Chiefs are currently top of the log‚ it’s the end of the month and a Saturday night game‚ so we are expecting demand far exceeding 21,500. "But the PSL is insisting that the game must be played. At the first meeting with police last week it was agreed not to hold the game but a second meeting was insisted on and this also agreed that it would not be safe. "But the police commissioner has been instructed from national headquarters to hold a third meeting … tomorrow [Wednesday] to reconsider. "The police are also stretched because of the event at the Cape Town Stadium and the rugby at Newlands [Stormers against the Bulls]," the Ajax boss said. "In the meantime we are unable to sell tickets until we know if the game is going ahead or not," Efstathiou said. "If we are forced to go ahead with the game we face being liable for any problems that occur," he said. "The police have only 80 members who are available to handle matters outside and we have a security contingent of 400 inside the stadium." Efstathiou said he had been in almost daily contact with PSL CEO Mato Madlala but she said she could not make a decision without a police report. Madlala and PSL spokesman Lux September could not be reached for comment on Tuesday afternoon. TMG Digital