Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan is likely to target income, alcohol and tobacco taxes in his February 22 budget to reassure rating agencies that he will gradually rein in the deficit in coming years, a Reuters poll found. The poll, taken in the past week, shows economists expect the government to target a budget deficit of 3.2% of GDP in the fiscal year from April 1. This is narrower than the 3.4% estimated for the fiscal year about to end. The treasury is then expected to narrow the budget deficit further to 2.8% of GDP in the 2018-19 fiscal year, and to 2.5% the following year. Most of the 15 economists surveyed expect the treasury to boost revenue with personal income tax hikes, as well as levies on purchases of often harmful goods, such as alcohol and tobacco products, to plug a R28bn ($2.15bn) shortfall in the new financial year. "The fiscal situation is a huge challenge for the South African government given increasingly difficult debt dynamics," wrote IHS Markit economist Thea Fourie in a note. "On one hand, there is an urgent need to lower the budget deficit to avoid a sovereign risk downgrade to sub-investment status; on the other hand, fiscal adjustments that will impact GDP growth adversely should be avoided." A fuel levy increase, as well as higher VAT, were listed as other possible options for Gordhan to generate new revenue. IHS Markit’s Fourie noted that an indirect tax such as VAT, rather than income tax, has the potential to provide more substantial fiscal revenue growth but may be too politically sensitive an option at the moment. SA has not escaped the risk of being downgraded to junk status after it got a reprieve in December. Standard and Poor’s (S&P) and Fitch’s ratings are both one level above junk status; Moody’s is two notches above. Moody’s, which put SA on negative watch in its review, is due to revisit that on April 7, followed by S&P at the beginning of June. Poor economic growth in SA has stymied the government’s ability to generate revenue, and there is no major turnaround imminent. The latest Reuters poll predicted just 1.0% growth this year, followed by 1.6% next year. A wave of global trade protectionism sweeping rich nations could also sap some demand for SA’s exports. However, that may be offset by stronger commodity prices. Reuters