The Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu) will this week consider its position on the national minimum wage and the state of the alliance. Cosatu will be holding a briefing after the central executive committee meeting on Thursday, when it is expected to announce its formal position on the proposed national minimum wage. National Economic Development and Labour Council social partners, with the exception of Cosatu, signed off on an agreement that will see the introduction of a minimum monthly wage of R3,500, or R20 per hour, to take effect in May 2018. Cosatu, which said it would put the issue to its members, has dismissed suggestions that its decision not to sign the agreement — which was taken on the eve of President Jacob Zuma’s state of the nation address — was rooted in factional battles. The political fallout from Friday’s violence in Tshwane during an anti-immigration march is likely to linger amid considerations of policy changes to SA’s immigration laws and as a crackdown by home affairs on employers continues. The department has vowed to increase policing at businesses that are allegedly sidelining South Africans in order to employ immigrants. On the parliamentary front, the portfolio committee on communications will be presented with the SABC’s performance and expenditure reports for the first and second quarters of 2016-17. This oversight comes as Parliament continues to probe the state of management at the public broadcaster, which has been racked in recent years by internal and external battles over the status of controversial former chief operating officer Hlaudi Motsoeneng. On Friday, the portfolio committee on water and sanitation is expected to plumb the financial depths of Minister Nomvula Mokonyane’s department. Recent reports cited senior Treasury officials saying the Department of Water and Sanitation was on the brink of bankruptcy because of a collapse in internal controls, project management and contract management. The department has denied this, but its officials are likely to face tough questions in Parliament about the controversies surrounding the Lepelle Northern Water Board’s emergency infrastructure project in Mopane, Limpopo. The project has been blamed for ballooning irregular and fruitless and wasteful expenditure in the department, while Mokonyane is seen as among those ministers leading in allegations that the Treasury is overly intractable when it comes to project funding.