Bengaluru — Gold prices held steady on Monday, with investors looking ahead to a clutch of speeches from US Federal Reserve officials later in the week for clues on the timing of possible interest rate hikes. Spot gold had edged down 0.1% to $1,234.28/oz by 3.19am GMT, while US gold futures fell 0.3% to $1,235.2. "We expect muted trading to start the week in Asia with a US holiday today, although a break in gold of $1,231 may flush away some nervous long positions," said Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst at Oanda. The US markets are closed on Monday for the Presidents’ Day holiday. Asian share markets were mixed on Monday as political uncertainty globally kept the mood cautious, while the US dollar recouped early losses ahead of the busy week for the Fed. The dollar was mostly unchanged against a basket of currencies at 100.93. At least five Fed officials are due to speak this week, while Fed Board governor Jerome Powell appears on Wednesday. Cleveland Fed president Loretta Mester said on Monday she would be comfortable raising interest rates at this point if the economy kept performing the way it did. Speculation the central bank could hike as soon as March has generally underpinned the greenback, although large long positions leave the market vulnerable to sudden pullbacks. Bullion is highly sensitive to rising US interest rates, as these increase the opportunity cost of holding nonyielding bullion, while boosting the dollar, in which it is priced. "On the fundamental side, although a stronger dollar and buoyant US equity could potentially act as a drag on gold, other variables will probably prevent a more significant selloff," INTL FCStone analyst Edward Meir said in a note. Concern over US President Donald Trump’s policies, as well as elections in Europe this year, fuelled gold’s rise to a peak of $1,244.67 on February 8, the strongest in nearly three months. The metal has risen nearly 8% in 2017. Spot gold could break support at $1,233/oz, said Reuters technical analyst Wang Tao. Meanwhile, US Commodity Futures Trading Commission data showed on Friday that speculators cut their net long position in Comex gold for the first time in three weeks in the week to February 14. In other metals, silver fell 0.1% to $17.95/oz, while platinum shed 0.5% to $995.55. Palladium declined 0.2% to $774.05/oz, down from $795.1, the highest since January 24, in the previous session. Reuters