PwC, the accounting firm responsible for tabulating Oscar ballots, apologised for one of the biggest gaffes in Oscar history, accepting the blame for a snafu that blemished its reputation at an event it has successfully shepherded for 83 years. The company has used the Oscar spotlight for years to burnish its image and drum up business in Hollywood and beyond. On Monday, PwC said it mixed up the envelopes given to presenters Warren Beatty and Faye Dunaway, an error that led to La La Land being incorrectly given the best-picture statuette before the unscripted surprise twist: Moonlight had actually won. “We are currently investigating how this could have happened, and deeply regret that this occurred,” Caroline Nolan, a PwC spokeswoman, said in an e-mailed statement. The incident, broadcast live in front of an audience of millions, raises questions about PwC’s handling of a high-profile account it has highlighted as a symbol of its accuracy. Only two senior managers of the firm, known for its accounting and consultancy services, knew who had won before the awards were announced. “It’s hugely embarrassing for PwC and it makes them look a bit ridiculous,” said Paul Hitchens, founder of Verve, which helps companies build and maintain brands. Dunaway, on stage with Beatty, announced La La Land as the winner and members of the cast and production team had already taken the stage when they were corrected. Instead, the coming-of-age film about a black gay man, Moonlight, distributed by tiny entertainment company A24, walked away with Sunday night’s big award. PwC collects and counts the votes, and brings a backup set of envelopes with the winners to the event. For best picture, Beatty said he was passed a card with the name of Emma Stone for La La Land — the best-actress award she had won earlier in the evening. “We sincerely apologise to Moonlight, La La Land, Warren Beatty, Faye Dunaway, and Oscar viewers for the error,” PwC said in the statement. PwC’s balloting team was led by Martha L Ruiz, who has spent more than 10 years working behind the scenes on the Oscars, and Brian Cullinan, who had worked on the leadership balloting team since 2014, according to the company’s website. The pair were the only two to know the Oscar winners before the envelopes were opened and were responsible for handing the envelopes to the presenters before they went on stage, according to a video interview on the company’s website. The company was given the balloting role “because of the reputation PwC has in the marketplace for being a firm of integrity, accuracy and confidentiality”, Cullinan says in the interview. “It’s symbolic of how we’re thought of beyond this role and how our clients think of us, and it’s something we take very seriously.” In a Financial News article about the work published last Friday, Cullinan said the balloting process doesn’t come up for tender as long as PwC’s relationship with the Academy of Motion Picture Arts & Sciences is strong and the firm does a good job, “which we always do”. Moonlight star Mahershala Ali, winner of the best supporting actor award for his portrayal of a drug-dealing father figure, said the mix-up threw him. “It’s very hard to feel joy in a moment like that,” he said. “I didn’t want to go up there and take anything from somebody.”Bloomberg