The University of Pretoria (Tuks), which is owed more than R200m by students, is flirting with sliding into deficit because of pressure arising from not making provision for "missing middle" students. The funding crisis and rising student debt have created a revenue headache for universities, which generate most of their income from students’ tuition fees. Tuks is the third major university to warn of a looming deficit after University of the Witwatersrand vice-chancellor Adam Habib told Business Day in January Wits would record its first deficit in about 11 years and the University of Cape Town said it would be headed in that direction in three years. Since the calls for free higher education started, the freeze on fee hikes in 2016 and universities foregoing registration fees for some students, higher education institutions have had to find alternative sources of funding to plug the gaps created by these multiple concessions. In the 2015 financial year the University of Pretoria received R1.6bn in government subsidies and grants, with the rest of its R5.5bn operating revenue earned from tuition and other fees, with donations and gifts. Spokesman Rikus Delport said: "In order for the university council … to approve a break-even budget, the university has to withdraw funds from existing reserves, [because] part of operational expenses are funded from reserves." Missing-middle students are defined as those who do not qualify for National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) funding because they are considered too wealthy for financial aid, as they come from households earning from R120,000 to R600,000 annually. The Department of Higher Education and Training, which in October 2016 gave universities the go-ahead to increase fees by up to 8%, confirmed this week it would pay fee hikes for qualifying students who come from households earning R600‚000 a year or less as a grant‚ not a loan. The gap funding will cover tuition and accommodation increases at university or college-managed residences. The University of Pretoria has cash reserves for the 2017 academic year, but its high running costs — up to R320m a month — coupled with limited funding, will push its purse to the limit. Tuks’ 2015 annual financial results, its most recent reporting period, reflected a net surplus from operations of R312m. Delport said the amounts in respect of outstanding debtors and bad debts were likely to increase. Its financial statements reflected R77m in loans that were extended to students in 2015, R58m of which were impaired. Students also owed Tuks R270m in tuition fees, on which the university created a R96m impairment provision. The impairment provisions have risen on the previous year. Tuks student representative council deputy president Thabo Shingange said many missing-middle students were not being catered for so financing was an issue for them. Furthermore, NSFAS’ funding was capped for each student on the scheme, leaving those with higher fees trapped in historical debt. "The problem with historically white institutions is that they have a large number of students who come from poor backgrounds, but [who] are not accounted for in funding allocations," said Shingange. "You have a large constituency of missing-middle students. "The definition of missing-middle students as those who come from homes generating R600,000 annual income or less, was unrealistic, leaving many students locked out for NSFAS funding, which resulted in them getting into debt they had no means of servicing," said Shingange. The SRC was in talks with the private sector to secure funds for missing-middle students, Shingange said. About 20% of Tuks’ undergraduate students received NSFAS support in 2016, most of whom were allowed to register in 2017 after the scheme paid universities R1.3bn in January. However, students with historical debt had to make payment arrangements before they were allowed to register. Delport said Tuks provided R144m to cover historical debt. The funding crunch has not affected the university’s research output because external funders, including the government and the National Research Fund, donate funds for specific projects. The funds are used strictly for their intended purpose.