Few South Africans who enjoy a meal of hake and chips will appreciate the effort required to produce it: deep-sea trawlers fish at depths of up to 700m, often riding 6m swells off the fabled Cape of Storms as they do so, and processors add value to the raw material by filleting, coating and packaging one of SA’s most abundant and valuable natural resources. Yet the future of the sustainable, profitable and internationally admired South African deep-sea trawling industry is under threat now that the government has shown its hand and allocated rights to the industry’s little brother, the inshore trawl fishery for hake and sole. The latest chapter in this rights allocation saga will play itself out in the High Court in Cape Town on February 6 as Viking Inshore Fishing — an established company with five fishing vessels, a factory, fish shops and 179 employees in Mossel Bay — pleads for relief from the court after its inshore trawling division was devastated by a 60% quota cut. Round one has already been won by Viking. On January 3 Judge Lee Bozalek in effect suspended fishing in the inshore trawl fishery when he ordered Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Minister Senzeni Zokwana and the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries to refrain from issuing the permits that would allow right holders in the fishery to start catching their 2017 quotas. Fishing is suspended until the court rules on the matter. In his judgment, Bozalek said Viking Inshore Fishing had established a prima facie case that the department’s rights allocations were unlawful, irrational and procedurally unfair and that the company had a reasonable prospect of success on appeal and in review proceedings. One of the main issues underlying the case was the unconstitutional basis of the mechanism used by the department to allocate tonnages: Viking and other established companies lost out to 12 entrants (with no vessels, factories, fish shops or employees) because its black shareholding was lower than that of the newcomers. There’s no way to predict whether the court will come to the same conclusion as Bozalek on February 6, but the writing is clearly on the wall for the deep-sea trawling industry: the department is intent on pursuing a "transform at all costs" agenda, regardless of government policy, which purports to reward investment and performance as well as black economic empowerment (BEE). Ironically, it is doing so with an industry that has undergone massive structural changes in an effort to meet government policies on BEE. Although the ownership of the inshore trawl fishery doesn’t match the deep-sea trawl fishery exactly, there is plenty of overlap. A recent study by independent research and empowerment ratings agency Empowerdex pegged the deep-sea trawling industry’s degree of black ownership at 62.36%. When Business Report released its list of most empowered companies in 2016, two companies with fishing interests were at the top: African Equity Empowerment Investments, parent company to Premier Fishing, was in first place and SA’s biggest fishing company, the Oceana Group, was second. No one in the fishing industry was in the least surprised by this result; as early as 1994, the government linked quotas and BEE. White-owned fishing companies were quick to take action. Soon after the white paper on Marine Fisheries Policy was published in 1997, all the white-owned companies with stakes in the deep-sea and inshore trawl fisheries (and many other commercial fisheries) began to meaningfully transform and to conclude deals with black investors. They had to — their quotas depended on it. When it came to allocating long-term rights in 2005-06 (15-year rights for the deep-sea trawl fishery and 10-year rights for the inshore trawl fishery) the government took a pragmatic view, choosing not to open the doors too widely to newcomers while rewarding established companies that had transformed significantly at the shareholding level. It did this to preserve the investments in fishing and processing that make it possible for SA’s comparatively small fishing industry to compete internationally. Even though SA has strong local brands, fishing is essentially a global industry and local companies compete with Namibia, Argentina, New Zealand, the US, Russia and China, all of which produce substantially larger volumes of hake, cod, haddock and pollock, not to mention farmed salmon and a type of catfish called Pangasius, which is farmed on a massive scale in Asia. To compete, SA has been compelled to beneficiate locally. Rather than export commodity products (as is the choice of the Namibian hake fishing industry, which takes advantage of highly favourable export tariffs), the local industry produces fillets, loins, steaks, folded and moulded products and coated and crumbed hake, mostly for retail markets where prices are right. To do this takes skill and investment, but 10 years of ramping up investments in vessels and processing plants has paid off: the South African industry has retained and even grown the export contracts that make it profitable, cushioning it from currency fluctuations and uncertain market conditions. The industry’s expansion into demanding markets in northern Europe (Germany and Switzerland for example) has largely been on the strength of its certification by the Marine Stewardship Council, the global gold standard of sustainability ratings. The long-term rights of deep-sea trawling companies will expire in 2020 and, if the industry is reading the department’s signals correctly, it can expect the doors to be opened to new entrants and further fragmentation of the industry to take place. Such a strategy will damage the industry, perhaps irrevocably. Without viable quotas, the vessels of the established operators will stand idle and their factories will close. Expecting the established companies to become service providers to the newcomers (renting their boats and processing facilities to the new quota holders) is naive — margins will shrink and investors will scurry for the hills. Even if the established operators sold their assets to the new entrants, it would take years before the newcomers could achieve the volumes and product quality that might enable them to secure the export contracts that underlie the industry’s profitability. Though the government will rationalise that the changes it is ringing in to the fishing industry are necessary to advantage black-owned businesses that were denied the opportunity to participate in the past, it must take cognisance of the degree to which the industry has transformed over the past 25 years. And it cannot ignore the impact that its decisions will have on the coastal and national economies. The deep-sea trawling industry employs 7,050 South Africans in permanent jobs, with regular wages and employee benefits. Countless businesses in associated industries, such as the marine maintenance and repair sector, depend on its success. There is no need to further fragment the ownership of the deep-sea trawling industry. Instead, the market and the usual laws of economics should be allowed to play their roles to achieve the maximum benefit for all stakeholders. • Augustyn is secretary of the Deep-Sea Trawling Industry Association.