A special sitting of the ANC national executive committee (NEC) took place on Monday to ratify policy proposals ahead of the party’s policy conference to take place at the end of June. The party has placed radical economic transformation at the centre of its agenda for 2017 and expectations are that this shift will be reflected in its policy documents to be discussed at the June gathering and finalised in December at its national conference. The ANC is under pressure from the electorate to quicken economic growth and stem rising unemployment. It is also under pressure to grow its political presence after suffering losses in key metros in last August’s municipal elections. The NEC approved the policy documents before their public release in the coming weeks. ANC spokesman Zizi Kodwa said the party had stuck to its agenda and discussed only its policy proposals, despite speculation that there would be calls for the removal of Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan by loyalists to President Jacob Zuma. The Treasury and Gordhan are at the centre of the debate around radical economic transformation. Zuma said that the department was an obstacle to effective policies to transform the economy at the party’s January lekgotla. Calls from the ANC structures loyal to Zuma including the women’s league, youth league and military veterans, for Gordhan’s removal have increased in frequency, putting pressure on the finance minister in the run-up to the delivery of his budget on Wednesday. Former Eskom acting CE Brian Molefe’s swearing-in as an MP, set to take place this week, has fuelled speculation of the pending Cabinet reshuffle that could see Gordhan leaving the Treasury. Molefe has been tipped to take over from Gordhan since 2016. Molefe’s new post as an MP has split the ANC in the North West with former leaders charging that it was procedurally flawed as he was not a member of a branch in the province, the ticket used to ease his entry into Parliament. ANC alliance partner, the South African Communist Party, also rejected Molefe’s entry into Parliament, with its provincial office in Limpopo saying that the move strengthened the "public outcry about corruption and the capture of the state by the parasitic bourgeoisie". The SACP in Limpopo said: "This is against the principle of legality where someone is fingered in a corruption report and at the same time promoted." Civil society and opposition parties have also opposed the move. Molefe was a central protagonist in the state of capture report by former public protector Thuli Madonsela who probed the influence of the Gupta family, Zuma’s friends and family benefactors on the government. The Centre for the Advancement of the South African Constitution (Casac) said Molefe was found to have been in telephonic communication with Ajay Gupta 58 times and had been in and around the vicinity of the Gupta residence in Saxonwold, Johannesburg, 19 times during a period when a company owned by the family secured contracts to supply coal to Eskom. "Molefe himself said that he resigned from Eskom ‘in the interests of good corporate governance’. This was an acknowledgement that his continuation in office would negatively impact on Eskom," Casac executive director Lawson Naidoo said.