Net1 subsidiary Cash Paymaster Services (CPS) will be in a strong bargaining position when talks with the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) get under way in the coming week on the extension of its contract to pay social grants beyond the March 31 expiry date. Sassa is relying on CPS to continue paying social grants after this date and has no viable alternative. This will put Net1 in a position to call the shots, but Sassa CEO Thokozani Magwaza said on Wednesday that he would not allow Sassa to be taken to the cleaners. Sassa will approach the Constitutional Court in the next week or so for approval to extend the contract with CPS, which the court declared invalid and unlawful in 2013. It will ask for a one-year extension of the suspension of the invalidity order. This would give Sassa time to prepare for the takeover of the payment of social grants to 17-million beneficiaries, a process that started three years ago and should have been finalised by now. Questioned by members of Parliament’s social development committee, Magwaza said he did not believe the court would refuse the application. Sassa executive manager Raphaahle Ramokgopa told the committee that an extension of the CPS contract was the only option available if the beneficiaries were to be paid on April 1. Ramokgopa said the Treasury supported an alternative to extending the CPS contract. This would involve appointing a service producer to make cash payments to beneficiaries who received their grants at cash paypoints and using the banking sector to distribute grants to banked beneficiaries. However, Sassa believed that this option would not enable Sassa to pay on April 1. She said that the current CPS payment cards expired in December 2017 and Sassa had been given the assurance that all cards would still operate on April 1. "For the biometric system, predominantly used at cash paypoints, these cards will expire on March 31," she said. "Approximately 3-million to 4-million people make use of this system and may not have the alternative PIN activated on their card [and thus will not be able to use the National Payment System infrastructure]. "These encryption keys can be extended automatically over the next few months when beneficiaries draw their cash. However, agreement needs to be reached with CPS." Another risk that needed to be managed, Ramokgopa added, was that with the limited time available Sassa might not be able to successfully issue an expression of interest to banks for services and for them to respond meaningfully in time. Net1 CEO Serge Belamant said Net1 would prefer to enter into a new contract rather than see the current contract extended and would seek an extension for longer than the one year proposed by Sassa. This is exactly what opposition party MPs fear. "A longer period would in addition result in a lower price as many items are expensed over the duration of the contract," said Belamant. DA and Inkatha Freedom Party MPs said Sassa officials must have known for some time that the agency would not be ready for the takeover. DA social development spokeswoman Bridget Masango said Sassa had deliberately not made preparations in order to "manufacture an emergency" to allow it to continue with the Net1/CPS contract. Magwaza denied under questioning by opposition party MPs that he had come under political pressure to extend the contract of CPS. He had been critical of the "wrongdoings" of the company and would not under any circumstances succumb to political pressure to extend its contract, he said.