Nedbank managed to improve its credit-loss ratio and grow profit faster than revenue in its home market during 2016 — an impressive performance marred by losses from its pan-African associate Ecobank. In contrast to Barclays Africa, which reported last Thursday that its credit loss-ratio widened to 1.08% from 0.92%, Nedbank said on Tuesday its credit-loss ratio narrowed to 0.68% from 0.77%. Nedbank declared a final dividend of R6.30, taking its total for 2016 to R12 — an 8.4% increase on the previous year’s R11.07, and beating Barclays Africa’s 3% dividend growth. A R287m headline loss contributed by its rest of Africa division — mainly its 20%-owned Ecobank — slowed its overall headline earnings growth to 6% on 11% growth in operating income. Nedbank’s results for the year to end-December showed its retail and business banking (RBB) division contributed 57% of its R45bn operating income and 43% of its R11.5bn headline earnings. Its corporate investment banking (CIB) division contributed 30% of operating income and 52% of headline earnings. The wealth division contributed a balanced 10% of both income and earnings. Its rest of Africa division contributed 4% of income, but reduced headline earnings by 3%. "The performance of our approximately 20% investment in Ecobank was below our expectations, as it was impacted by weaker economic conditions in West Africa and currency volatilities, particularly in Nigeria," CEO Mike Brown said in the results statement. The group impaired its holding in Ecobank by R1bn down to R4bn. Nedbank’s own managed businesses outside SA managed to mitigate Ecobank’s losses somewhat. The R374m headline loss Ecobank contributed was cut to R287m by R87m headline earnings contributed by Nedbank’s own managed operations outside SA. Nedbank’s Retail and Business Banking (RBB), Corporate and Investment Banking (CIB) and wealth divisions all managed to grow profit faster than income. RBB reported 9% income growth and 11% earnings growth, CIB reported 13% income growth and 15% earnings growth, and wealth grew income 1% and earnings 5%. The improvement in credit-loss ratio was thanks to lower impairments across all clusters, the company said in its results statement. "The credit-loss ratio reflects improvements in CIB’s impairments following the increase in oil and other commodity prices and the settlement or successful restructuring of certain counters during the year. RBB’s credit-loss ratio improved to below the lower end of its through-the-cycle target range. The improvement was underpinned by lower impairments in personal loans and business banking." Nedbank’s results also contrasted with Barclays Africa’s in that Nedbank managed to cut its head office overheads by 76% to a R159m reduction in income from R650m in 2015. "The decrease in losses in the centre was largely due to the lower cost of basis risk retained in the centre," Nedbank said.