It is now clear that the relationship between Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan and South African Revenue Service (SARS) commissioner Tom Moyane has broken down entirely. For SA, this is a disaster. Without trust and full co-operation between these two important institutions, public finances and the economy are in jeopardy. In the Budget Review, Treasury named uncertainty over the "path of revenue collection" as a key risk. Gordhan said SARS’s anticipated undercollection by R30bn for the year was not due to economic weakness alone and he had concerns about tax administration. Obviously Moyane does not share Gordhan’s concerns. Despite the shortfall, documents show he signed off on bonuses for himself and other senior management for the year despite Gordhan instructing him not to. (On Friday, Moyane said he had not yet taken the bonus.) The question now is what can be done? Sadly, the answer is that the possibilities for a satisfactory resolution border on nil. The only person with the power to sort out the mess is President Jacob Zuma. He promised Gordhan a year ago he would mediate their relationship. However, Zuma, who should have the leadership and commitment to his country to sort out the problem, has decided not to. That is because he, Moyane and the rest of their clique – which appears to be run by the Gupta family – are focused solely on advancing and protecting their own interests. This includes gaining control of SARS and Treasury. Over the past year, the ground has been well prepared for Gordhan’s removal. He has been intimidated and threatened with arrest more than once. It’s possible Zuma thought he would be gone by now. The latest plaintive appeal by Moyane — that he is treated like a small boy by Gordhan – may again be an attempt to create such an environment. If it is so patently clear the two cannot work together, the conclusion would have to be that one would have to go. There are no prizes for guessing who the Guptas and their runners in the ANC believe that should be. With the country on tenterhooks over a reshuffle, we will soon know what Zuma’s decision will be. Firing Gordhan is laden with risks, not just to the country but to Zuma too who will certainly face a backlash inside the ANC. In the meantime, Moyane has asked Zuma to appoint a retired judge to mediate and provide guidance on his powers, in particular whether the SARS commissioner is accountable to the finance minister. The basis for this question appears to be in the South African Revenue Service Act, which was amended in 2002 so that the president and not the finance minister would appoint the commissioner. Moyane was the first commissioner to be appointed by Zuma after the previous commissioner – Oupa Magashula – had his tenure cut short in an incident closely resembling a honey trap. But while the act changed the appointing agent, Moyane remains accountable to Gordhan under the Public Finance Management Act. It is also the finance minister who must table the SARS strategic plan in Parliament; it is through the finance minister that SARS must account to Parliament. Factionalism and what has become aptly known as state capture is destroying government institutions. The National Prosecuting Authority, the South African Police Service and the undermining and corrupting of state-owned enterprises have eaten away at the state’s ability to govern and deliver services. These are services used most of all by the poor. This will all pale into insignificance compared with the hollowing out of SARS. With the destruction of the government’s capacity to raise revenue, the country will head only in one direction — and it will happen dangerously fast.