Launceston — If you were looking for evidence of reduced crude oil supply from oil cartel Opec and its main ally in cutting output to boost prices, Russia, then stay away from Asia’s top importers. January import data from China, India and Japan do little to show the effect of reduced crude supply, but do suggest that prices have risen in response to move by the producer group and its allies to remove about 1.8-million barrels a day from global oil markets. Top importer China’s January data provide a case in point. Imports rose 27.5% from the year-earlier month to 34.03-million tonnes, equivalent to 8.01-million barrels a day. That is an impressive increase, believed mainly to be due to additions to strategic reserves and rising demand from smaller, private refiners that are now allowed to import crude. Saudi Arabia — the main driver behind Opec’s decision in November to cut output — increased exports to China by 18.9% to the equivalent of 1.18-million barrels a day in January from the year-earlier period. This was also up a massive 40% from the 841,000 barrels a day China imported from the kingdom in December. The increase speaks more of a determined attempt by Saudi Arabia to keep key customers in Asia well supplied, and cut supplies to other buyers in other, less vital parts of the world. However, there is another factor to consider: Chinese customs data does tell us where each barrel of oil comes from, but it does not tell us when that barrel was shipped. It is possible that the surge of imports from Saudi Arabia in January was partially related to barrels moving from floating or other storage to delivery, as traders responded to the expected tightening of the market and move of the oil futures curve from contango toward backwardation. When markets are oversupplied, it is cheaper to buy crude now than to buy it for delivery later. That structure is called contango. On the other hand, when supply becomes so tight that the current price of oil becomes higher than the price of oil for delivery many months or years into the future, that is called backwardation. Nonetheless, even if some of the barrels arriving are from trade-related storage plays, it is still clear that China is not feeling its supplies being constrained by the countries committed to cutting output. Imports from Russia rose 36.5% in January from the same month in 2016 to the equivalent of 1.08-million barrels a day, while those from Angola surged 63.5% to 1.16-million barrels a day. Other Opec producers also saw their share of Chinese imports grow by more than overall January imports, with Iraq up 43.2% and Venezuela 80.1%. The losers among major suppliers were Iran, with China’s imports dropping 1.3% in January, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE), whose exports to China declined by 15.5%. Volumes to Asia up, prices too Turning to India, its imports from Saudi Arabia amounted to 925,700 barrels a day in January, up 36.1% from December and down 1.4% from the same month in 2016. India also imported more in January than in December from Opec members Iran (up 1.5%), Iraq (up 2.1%) and Angola (up 60.2%). However, imports from the UAE were down 8% and from Kuwait 41.4%, although that country is not a major supplier to India. In Japan, Asia’s third-biggest oil importer, purchases from top supplier Saudi Arabia fell to 1.3-million barrels a day in January from December’s 1.43-million, but were still 11.8% higher than the same month last year. Imports from Japan’s number-two supplier, the UAE, fell from 884,057 barrels a day in December to 752,973 barrels a day in January, while imports from Russia rose to 214,498 barrels a day from December’s 194,285. It is also worth noting that Japan’s total January imports were 3.315-million barrels a day, about 349,000 barrels a day lower than December’s 3.664-million barrels a day. Overall, imports from Saudi Arabia in January by Asia’s three biggest oil purchasers rose to 3.41-million barrels a day from 2.947-million in December, a 15.2% jump. The picture that emerges is Asia is largely unaffected by Opec and its allies’ cuts to output — at least for now. The main effect is being felt through higher prices, with Chinese customs data showing that the cost of a barrel of Saudi oil went up to the equivalent of $53.77 in January from $45.20 in December. This was a far sharper increase than the overall cost of China’s oil, which rose to $52.20 a barrel in January from December’s $46.30. It is pricing that may well end being the major driver of change in Asia’s oil markets, with buyers being tempted away from cargoes from the Opec and allied producers towards those outside of the deal to limit output, such as the US. China imported 1.88-million of crude from the US in January, the equivalent of one very large crude carrier (VLCC). For the whole of last year, it imported the equivalent of two VLCCs from the US. If US oil can compete price-wise with cargoes from the Middle East, it may tempt Chinese refiners to buy more, especially if the Opec output cuts do drain stored oil and start to crimp available prompt cargoes. For Opec and Russia, the question may eventually become deciding whether they can continue to keep Asia well supplied and maintain their relative market shares, while still inflicting enough pain elsewhere to keep oil prices on a rising trend. Reuters