In a fast-changing world, SA and France have a lot to do together, in all areas. We are already strategic partners, but we can do more. This is the reason for my visit to Tshwane and Johannesburg on Thursday and Friday.With the changing economic climate in Europe, specifically with regards to the imminent Brexit, France is here to confirm its support of and partnership with SA and to showcase trade and investment opportunities.SA has a strong and balanced partnership with the EU, of which France is a founding member. As one of Europe&rsquo;s leading economies, I can safely say we are here to stay.Following the Economic Partnership Agreement between SA and the EU that came into force at the end of last year, the development of bilateral exchanges has become even easier. Our mutual interests extend further than the EU as France and SA are members of the G20, where we share similar positions on major areas of interest.We share the commitment to strengthening international financial architecture, including the sustainable financing of poor commodity export countries. France is chairing the G20 working group dedicated to making this a reality.France and SA are also united in their views on international taxation and the prevention of tax evasion, profit shifting and illicit financial flows.On a continental level, SA is the economic gateway to Southern Africa. The country is an ideal hub from which to enlarge business activities towards the regional markets of the Southern African Development Community and the Indian Ocean.France is an important trading partner of SA. There are more than 360 French companies and subsidiaries based in SA, employing more than 37,000 people directly.We cover all sectors including energy, hospitality, transport and construction. This is a strong basis to go further.France is committed to supporting SA s economic transformation through capacity building and investment in the industrial sector.It strongly supports local job creation, technology transfers and training and skills development. A good example of this is our involvement in the daily operation of the Gautrain.In skills development in the country, what comes to mind are programmes offered by the likes of the French South African Schneider Electric Centre and French company Alstom s railway centre of excellence.With the support of the French authorities, companies based in SA stand ready to contribute to new projects in the energy sector such as the nuclear build programme a field of expertise in my country.France and SA have been partners in successfully running the only nuclear plant in Africa, at Koeberg, for more than 30 years.As leaders in technology and innovation, SA and France can foster new dynamics to build local entrepreneurship in this field. French start-up companies are increasingly visible and dynamic in SA, especially in Cape Town.The creation of a French Tech Hub in Cape Town at the beginning of 2016 has led to the development and improvement of a mutually beneficial business climate in the private sector.With the recent launch of the French Tech Lab, also in Cape Town, the goal for 2017 is to intensify French investments in SA, for the mutual benefit of both countries. At the end of 2016, an international French business delegation, Mouvement des Entreprises de France International, undertook a prospecting mission to SA proof that we act on our promises.Through the support of CAP40, a community of young and innovative French and South African entrepreneurs in the Western Cape, France has been able to meaningfully change its traditional image, deliberately steering the ship in the direction of innovation. France ranks third in the world in terms of the number of innovative companies.Another example of excellence in our vibrant bilateral partnership lies in the work of the French Development Agency (AFD).Their long-term financial support, with a loan portfolio close to 1bn, shows our commitment alongside SA to the future of the region.The relationship between AFD and the Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) is a shining example of our ongoing commitment to SA. We are proud to support the financing operations of DBSA as a lender in sub-Saharan Africa through the implementation of a $100m credit line.These key co-operation areas will form the core of my discussions with the South African authorities. I strongly believe in the expansion of our existing partnership to the benefit of both our countries. Sapin is the French minister of economy and finance.&nbsp;