The growth of infrastructure development is expected to be a casualty of some of the hard trade-offs in Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan’s budget speech, with growth in transport infrastructure slowing by hundreds of millions of rand, despite growing demand. The reduction in funding for public transport infrastructure, including bus rapid transit (BRT) systems, is bound to extend delays in public transport projects around South African cities which are already taking years to complete. Johannesburg, Cape Town, Tshwane and George are some cities that have delivered on BRT systems in recent years, while Ekurhuleni is continuing with its own network. From a total of R195.8bn allocated to local infrastructure development, municipal equitable infrastructure grants receive the lion’s share at R72.9bn. While human settlement as well as water and municipal infrastructure projects get R78.8bn, public transport is allocated R44.1bn. According to the government’s own research, South African commuters endure some of the longest commutes anywhere in the world, with transport providers battling with low urban densities, high early morning to late evening demand peaks, and poor turnover. Briefing the media ahead of his speech, Gordhan said much of the infrastructure affected by the cuts was for projects where implementing agents underspent their allocations. "Many cuts that you are seeing in infrastructure are in the outer years and are not making an impact on the current budget." According to the estimates, the grant will increase at an average annual rate of 7.6%, from R5.6bn in 2016-17 to R7bn in 2019-20. This will serve to support construction in 13 cities and fund the operating costs of services in Joburg, Tshwane, Cape Town and George. While the Public Transport Network Grant would see a 7.6% average annual rise, a Cabinet-approved reduction in its allocations of over R600m meant that the growth of the allocation has slowed down significantly. "The number of weekday passenger trips on these networks in these four cities is expected to increase from 163,280 in 2016-17 to 308,681 in 2019-20," according to the estimates of national expenditure. According to the estimates, the Cabinet-approved reductions of R687.4m in transfers for Sanral will lead to delays in road upgrades and the strengthening of SA’s non-toll road network. Gordhan highlighted five catalytic integrated urban development projects aimed at reshaping urban areas in metros such as Joburg, Ekurhuleni, Cape Town, Mangaung and eThekwini, and said spatial transformation was a priority. Overcoming the various challenges relied on collaboration between government and the private sector.