A highly technical bill intended to strengthen the prudential regulation of the insurance industry was attacked by black business in Parliament on Tuesday, for reinforcing the barriers to their entry into the sector. The intervention by the Black Business Council and four black-owned insurance companies urging transformation of the white-dominated insurance industry, was supported by MPs across the political spectrum. It added further momentum to the drive for "radical economic transformation", a theme that President Jacob Zuma is expected to emphasise in his state of the nation address Thursday. Already there are strong calls for the transformation of the banking sector, and Parliament’s standing committee on finance is to hold a public hearing on transformation of the financial services sector — including the banking and insurance industries — on March 14. Representatives of the black-owned insurance companies complained that the licence conditions, high audit and actuarial fees, excessively demanding standards and a heavy regulatory burden served to exclude black players from the market. They dismissed the provisions for micro-insurance in the bill as merely creating a "playground" for blacks, while the main action took place in the established, white-dominated sector of the industry. Financial Services Board deputy executive officer Jonathan Dixon said the FSB was open to including measures to facilitate transformation as long as this did not undermine policyholder protection. Finance committee chairperson Yunus Carrim noted that transformation had to include both de-racialisation of ownership as well as protecting the most vulnerable policyholders. "The committee is reaching a point where it is beginning to say you have to do far more, far more quickly," Carrim said. EFF MP Floyd Shivambu said the insurance industry still reflected pre-1994 ownership patterns. Insurance legislation since then had not facilitated black participation in the industry. Parliament could not just pass legislation dealing with compliance — it had to address transformation as well. "We cannot postpone this," Shivambu stressed. ANC MP Sfiso Buthelezi said moral suasion had not succeeded in achieving transformation and the racially skewed ownership patterns in the industry could not be left unchanged. DA MP Brandon Topham agreed on the need for transformation but emphasised the need to balance this with maintaining technical standards. Workerslife CEO Zwi Mdletshe criticised the new solvency standards and capital adequacy requirements introduced in the bill for insurers, saying they were too onerous for small businesses. "Any consideration of this bill must be centred around transformation," he said. Furthermore, the bill should make the use of emerging auditing and accounting firms mandatory for insurance companies. Mdletshe argued that the failure of the bill to explicitly include transformational objectives was unconstitutional. He called for the provisions on microinsurance to be scrapped "because it promotes the balkanisation of the insurance industry and is likely to perpetuate past imbalances. The Insurance Bill should rather proactively promote the opening up of the entire insurance industry." Black Business Council secretary general George Sebulela said the council supported the measures to protect policyholders but was concerned about the costs that introducing the new solvency and assessment management system would impose on insurers, especially small businesses with high costs and low profit margins. A lot of small players could also be put out of business because they were unable to meet the financial soundness requirements stipulated in the bill. "An objective of the bill is to increase access to insurance for all South Africans. If the cost implications are not properly quantified, the opposite may be the reality, " Sebulela warned. The limitations on commission would also hit the income of intermediaries. © Business Day 2017