When MPs begin discussing the potential names for the SABC’s interim board, they will have a real opportunity to make a significant change. Being an interim board, candidates with the ability to manage a crisis as well as expertise in restructuring, are likely to be considered. While the board’s immediate priority will be to resolve the failure, members of the interim board may stay on as permanent. Parliament will seek to appoint individuals who are not only accountable to various stakeholders, including taxpayers, but are also accountable to the function a state broadcaster plays within an emerging economy with vast economic disparities. Appointing the right board, for any company, depends on following proper corporate governance. Did the executive seek objective or external advice to find the right board members? Did they understand what criteria make up a successful board? Are they aware of how the changing business world is expecting more agility? When South African firms get it right, and they often do, well-functioning boards become the backbone of their success, whether private or state-owned. While using an independent third party, the process of board appointments is not only streamlined but can also assist with navigating the latest regulation and ensuring international best practice. Cronyism falls away in favour of merit through a robust appointment process, therefore reducing risk and the cost of having to possibly repeat the entire process within a few years. A strong board needs diversity. At the time of the 2008 crisis, mostly men dominated corporate governance leadership at institutional investors whereas now, seven of the 10 largest institutional investors in stocks have women as heads of corporate governance, according to data compiled by The New York Times. The financial crisis illustrated how business strategies driven by groupthink can cause entire economies to implode. While a transformation agenda can assist with encouraging diversity, there is also risk in linking transformation solely to gender or race. Diversity comes from age, working across regions and life experience. For example, chief digital officers are being appointed to boards, their average age being 28. Firms with operations across regions ensure South African board members are sitting on Kenyan boards, for example, and vice versa. Non-financial sector firms are hiring investment bankers from Panama who studied law in Georgetown and lived in New York, to bring a level of international and non-sector related experience. A diverse and transformed board should also not be compromised by a lack of practical business skills and understanding of how a particular company operates. Based on the briefs we receive from clients, black women chartered accountants are among the most sought-after board members. To address this requirement for tacit expertise, former executives of companies are re-joining their boards. Recent examples include Standard Bank appointing former CEO Jacko Maree to the board and Sizwe Nxasana, the former CEO of FirstRand, will also be re-joining his former employer as non-executive deputy chairperson later this year. There are success stories where CEOs move directly into a board position at the same company after retiring, but best practice requires a 2-3 year break, not only from the firm but the sector too. This encourages fresh thinking and diversity. A more sustainable approach to developing an already increasing talent pool of high-quality board members in SA is critical. Firms should consider board assessments and developing board specific succession plans. Assessments help ascertain personality traits as board members carry personal liability, making it vital to get the seats filled with the type of people prepared to take on this risk. The onus falls on all firms to develop this talent across their sectors ensuring boards have the right balance between diversity, transformation and practical skills. The future of the SABC and other firms across SA will surely benefit as a result. • Ayo is CEO of Odgers Berndtson Sub-Saharan Africa, an executive search firm.