Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan said on Wednesday that traders implicated in colluding on currency trades should be "dealt with". Gordhan was questioned ahead of his budget speech on the investigation undertaken by the Competition Commission into collusion by bank traders. He said it was good that the commission had identified the rogue traders and that they would be dealt with, although the minister cautioned that the Competition Tribunal still had to hear the case. "It is good that we are raising the question of a reckless culture in certain parts of financial institutions which leads to greed. Greed leads to more recklessness in terms of how profits are to be made so that higher salaries or bonuses can be paid," Gordhan said. "This is the kind of behaviour and kind of culture which permeated Wall Street prior to 2008 and resulted in the financial crisis and the great recession. We are quite clear. Those who are responsible must be dealt with and the full might of the law must be exercised if they are guilty." Reckless behaviour in financial institutions needed to be discouraged and acted against in the strongest possible manner, the minister said. "What we want at the end of the day is for financial institutions to act responsibly, to recognise that while they are essential to economic systems and societies they should also realise that if they do faulty and irresponsible things they have a big impact on countries and economies as well." He said the Treasury had called on the boards and management of banks to take greater care in the way they developed their risk models and their ability to detect such behaviours sooner rather than later. Reserve Bank governor Lesetja Kganyago said the revelations of collusive practices by bank traders supported the case for the twin peaks model of regulation because a market conduct regulator was needed. This was lacking at present and meant "things could easily fall between the cracks". Under the new legislation the Reserve Bank will be responsible for the prudential regulation of financial institutions. Kganyago said there was an international initiative under way by the Financial Stability Board to develop a global code for the fixed-income, currency and commodities markets.