Structural reforms to promote economic growth, the sale of nonstrategic assets and cutting spending are three ways Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan could address the government’s revenue shortfall, DA finance spokesman David Maynier said on Monday. Maynier and deputy spokesman Alf Lees presented the DA’s proposals for the 2017-18 budget which Gordhan will table in Parliament Wednesday. Tax increases are expected as a way of plugging the R28bn fiscal hole in 2017-18. But the DA MPs believed there were other ways to raise revenue apart from raising taxes, such as boosting economic growth, selling assets and cutting expenditure. Another instrument at the minister’s disposal, Maynier said, was to eliminate waste. "With decisive action to boost economic growth, government could raise significant amounts of additional revenue in 2017-18," he said. An increase of one percentage point in gross domestic product could raise R18.2bn in additional revenue in 2017-18, assuming a tax buoyancy rate of 1.43%. Regarding the sale of assets, Maynier noted that there were many nonstrategic assets which could be disposed of. The sale of government’s stake in Telkom alone could raise about R14.7bn. Much more could be done to cut spending by rationalising national and legislative organs and cutting spending on VIP protection services. Reducing irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure, and eliminating corruption, would also add significantly to savings. Maynier stressed the importance of a comprehensive spending review aimed at all three spheres of government and state owned entities. "A comprehensive spending review would require National Treasury, working together with national departments, provinces, municipalities and state owned entities to review the composition of spending, the efficiency of spending and future spending priorities with a view to reducing and reprioritising expenditure in the medium term between 2017-18 and 2019-20," Maynier said. "Savings identified as a result of the comprehensive spending review should be used to hold the fiscal line, fund further investment in infrastructure and fund programmes to provide opportunities for the millions of young people who do not have jobs or have given up looking for jobs." Maynier noted that the comprehensive spending review model had proved to be successful in Australia, Canada and the UK.