The Citi banking group has agreed to pay its fourth fine related to forex rigging after reaching a settlement with the Competition Commission on Monday. Citibank NA, the group’s consumer banking arm, was one of 18 banking entities named in the anti-trust regulator’s complaint to the tribunal, which claimed traders at the banks had rigged the market for the rand-dollar currency pair to maximise profits or avoid losses. Citi has agreed to pay R69.5m for its role in the saga. “Citi is pleased that the matter has been settled,” said Megs Naidu, a spokesman for Citi. “We will continue building upon the changes that we have already made to our systems, controls and monitoring processes. “Fostering a culture of ethical behaviour has been, and continues to be, a top priority for Citi.” It is the fourth fine related to forex rigging for the group. On November 11 2014, Citibank was fined $310m for forex benchmark rigging by the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission, which said Citibank had already taken remedial steps, including banning multi-bank chatrooms for its forex personnel. Citibank had also conducted an internal investigation of possible misconduct by its forex traders relating to foreign exchange benchmarks and implemented certain remedial measures to improve its internal controls. The US commission said traders had co-ordinated their illegal activities through private electronic chatrooms. Citibank was fined £225.6m the same day by the UK Financial Conduct Authority for failing to exercise adequate oversight over its forex desk dealing with the US dollar, the euro, the British pound, the Japanese yen, the Swedish krona, the Norwegian krone, the Australian dollar, the New Zealand dollar, the Swiss franc and the Canadian dollar. These are known as the G10 — the world’s most heavily-traded currencies. It paid another $925m fine to the US department of justice for conspiring to fix prices and rig bids for US dollars and euros exchanged on the forex spot market in the US and elsewhere. The terms of this settlement, signed on May 19 2015, included an obligation to co-operate fully with the US and “any other law enforcement authority or government agency designated by the US” in ongoing investigations contained in a sealed attachment to the settlement. Citi declined to comment on the justice department settlement, but the Competition Commission announced it had initiated a complaint against 11 banking entities the day the settlement agreement was signed. In the South African leg of global investigations around forex rigging, Citibank trader Christopher Cummins was accused by the Competition Commission of agreeing with other traders to push prices for bids and offers up or down to avoid losses or boost profits. A bid is the price traders pay on the market, while an offer is the price they quote to clients. Cummins pled guilty to conspiring to fix prices in the US department of justice’s long-running investigation into currency rigging in January, agreeing to co-operate with the justice department’s ongoing investigation. Cummins was also accused of posting false bids and offers on the Reuters trading platform to manipulate a daily benchmark rate on currencies, called the WMR fix. He was also party to the corruption of the difference between the bid and offer, called the bid-offer spread, which is essentially the margin traders earn for their services. “The settlement [between the Competition Commission and Citibank] was done to encourage speedy settlement and full disclosure to strengthen the evidence for prosecution of the other banks,” said competition commissioner Tembinkosi Bonakele. 