President Jacob Zuma has appealed to South Africans not to blame foreign nationals for criminal activities, as a group calling themselves “concerned residents” in Tshwane marched against immigrants. The march on Friday turned violent, with police having to fire tear gas and rubber bullets in the CBD. Later, a group of Somalis tried to attack a South African but Muhamed Abdulah‚ chairman of the Somali community in SA‚ stepped in and stopped the crowd from attacking him. “Today is very tense. It is chaos for our people. We can see the situation is not good‚ ” he said. Marchers left a trail of destruction on their 15km march to the CBD, tearing down the makeshift shelters of pilgrims camping outside the Tshwane Events Centre along WF Nkomo Street, where a weekend-long church service is held. A sea of about 1‚000 people coming from the western direction and heading east towards the city centre also overturned trailers acting as mobile kitchens used by businesspeople to sell to food to pilgrims. “We were sitting minding our own business when we saw a large group of people heading towards us. We saw road signs flying as they approached so we ran away leaving our belongings behind‚” said one of the pilgrims‚ Emmanuel Nkosi. The pilgrims were mostly Zimbabwean and Malawian followers of Malawian Prophet Shepherd Bushiri. Zuma reiterated his assertion that South Africans were not xenophobic and promised the problems they were raising about crime would be attended to. “Many citizens of other countries living in SA are law-abiding and contribute to the economy of the country positively,” Zuma said. “It is wrong to brandish all non-nationals as drug dealers or human traffickers. Let us isolate those who commit such crimes and work with government to have them arrested, without stereotyping and causing harm to innocent people.” The president has called on communities to help police with information relating to complaints that some foreign nationals were involved in selling drugs, human trafficking and other crimes. “The threats and counter-threats on social media must stop. All must exercise restraint, respect the laws of the land and work together to fight crime and build safer communities,” he said. Reymond Moyo‚ a Zimbabwean pilgrim‚ was too late to get away and was grabbed by the throat and slapped before he was searched for valuables and told to go home or die. The mob‚ some on foot while others rode in bakkies‚ cars and minibuses‚ proceeded to the CBD‚ attacking anyone trying to take a picture or video of them with a cell phone. A teenager walking up Bosman Street and listening to music on his cell phone through earphones felt the wrath of the mob. “Are you taking pictures? You are full of nonsense‚” one of the marchers said as he accosted his frightened victim with a stick. The youngster tried to run away but he was surrounded within seconds and thrown to the ground. The marshals intervened and he was then left alone. “Foreigners must go. Today is today. We will kill them. They are destroying South Africa‚” the group sang as they left the frightened young man. Calls for calm Last Saturday‚ community members torched two houses in Pretoria West over allegations of drug peddling and sex work. Protesters said their targets were “brothels and drug dens” run by migrants from elsewhere in Africa. On Monday night‚ 20 foreign-owned shops were looted in Atteridgeville‚ Lotus Gardens and Mamelodi East‚ while residents in Rosettenville‚ south of Joburg‚ burnt down 12 houses. On Thursday night, several places were burnt and vehicles looted in Atteridgeville. Nongovernmental organisation Section 27 condemned Friday’s “shameful xenophobic march” by the Mamelodi Concerned Residents grouping in Pretoria. “It is reprehensible‚ shocking and appalling. There have already been reports of looting of foreign-owned businesses and a lot of panic and concern,” the organisation said. The EFF joined the chorus, saying on Friday that it “vehemently condemns erupting xenophobic attacks” in Attridgeville‚ Mamelodi and surrounding areas. “The march against foreign nationals is disingenuous and is a platform for black-on-black violence,” ” the party said. “We call on our people to isolate hate crimes against fellow Africans. He said unemployment and inequality were "wrongfully ... blamed on African brothers and sisters, and black people from the developing world", but the ANC was to blame as it had failed to transform society. “We call on government law enforcement to ensure that there is no violent outbreaks and loss of life.” Shutdown Back in Atteridgeville‚ where marchers blocked all the main roads with burning tyres and rubble early in the morning‚ no establishment was opened for business. A dark cloud of smoke hung over the Mshenguville informal settlement as the main road running through the settlement was littered with burning tyres. Residents are now gearing for the worst in anticipation of the group’s return from Pretoria CBD. “It was bad in the morning. It was really scary as now anybody who was not part of the march was becoming a target. They even uprooted trees and damaged highways’ side barriers‚” a resident who only wanted to be identified as Molefe said. There is no public transport running between Atteridgeville and the Pretoria city centre‚ with stranded commuters having to walk the 15km distance. Police were on hand to prevent the group of protesters reaching a gathering of foreigners. Stun grenades were thrown and rubber bullets fired‚ TMG Multimedia reports. Some of the foreigners sheltered behind residential fences as the mob approached them. While most are not armed‚ police found machetes in one of the cars. Among the placards carried by the protesters was an appeal for US President Donald Trump “to come save us”. The Save SA campaign condemned the attacks on foreign nationals. Save SA accused some politicians of lighting the fire that burns”, and called on those in political office to do their utmost to calm the situation. “The disturbing number of attacks on foreign nationals, including those in Atteridgeville today, represent a growing social and political crisis, and real political leadership is needed before the situation escalates even further,” Save SA said. “We cannot afford more mob behaviour, and call on communities to exercise tolerance.” Save SA put some of the blame on Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba, who has made controversial comments about foreign nationals living in the city illegally. Mashaba came under fire in December when he called on all illegal immigrants to leave Johannesburg. Speaking at a media conference about his 100 days in office, the executive mayor reportedly said illegal immigrants got into the country criminally and should be treated as such. "They are holding our country to ransom and I am going to be the last South African to allow it," Mashaba said at the time. Save SA on Friday called on Mashaba to stop using “incendiary language” before more damage was done and lives were lost. With TMG Digital