London — Oil prices fell on Friday after US crude inventories rose for a seventh week, showing the market is still struggling to ease oversupply despite many producers’ efforts to rein in output. US crude stocks rose by 564,000 barrels in the week to February 17, according to the Energy Information Administration (EIA), although the gain was below analysts’ expectations for an increase of 3.5-million barrels. The continued rise in US inventories comes as members of oil cartel Opec and other producers have cut output. Their joint compliance with a production-reduction deal reached at the end of last year was about 86% in January, according to Opec sources quoting results from a technical committee meeting held this week. The US, which is not part of the deal, continues to ramp up production. Analysts at ING said they expected US output to keep rising as prices remained strong enough to encourage further drilling. Benchmark Brent crude oil was down 48c at $56.10 a barrel at 9.08am GMT, while US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) traded at $54.06 a barrel, down 39c. "Prices continue to retreat on repeated failure to rise above the upper end of their trading ranges and yesterday’s inventory data also weigh," said Carsten Fritsch, analyst at Commerzbank in Frankfurt. However, signs have started to emerge that traders are depleting storage levels, beefed up while oil prices were weak. In the US, traders are draining the priciest storage tanks as strengthening markets make it unprofitable to store for future sale and cuts in global production open export opportunities. "Current oil prices are neither sustainable for Opec or the industry," AB Bernstein said in a note. "As such, inventories will have to fall, which we expect will be clearer in the spring after the seasonal build." In Asia, traders are selling oil held in tankers anchored off Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia. More than 12-million barrels of oil had been taken out of storage in tankers berthed off Southeast Asian countries in February, shipping data in Thomson Reuters Eikon showed. Reuters