The share price of Mediclinic International, the private hospital group controlled by investment company Remgro, was sent reeling on Monday by a less than rosy trading update. Mediclinic’s shares, which have a primary listing on the London Stock Exchange, were down nearly 5% on the JSE in afternoon trading as the market registered its disappointment with the company’s performance in the Middle East. Mediclinic CEO Danie Meintjes said the company had performed stoutly in its two biggest markets — Switzerland and SA. But he noted that the company’s Middle East operations were a mixed bag. The Dubai-based operations fared satisfactorily, while the Abu Dhabi operations, acquired in the recent Al Noor Group reverse takeover, were still struggling in the second half of the financial year to end-March. The good news in the Middle East performance was a strong ramp-up in patient activity at the newly opened Mediclinic City Hospital North Wing in Dubai. But in Abu Dhabi, Meintjes said, patient volumes and operating performance continued to be below expectations, adding the downbeat trading was particularly pronounced in January. Mediclinic has now pencilled in a steeper revenue decline and a lower underlying operating margin for the Middle East for the full year to end March. The company expects Middle East revenue to range between 3-billion dirham ($817m) and 3.2-billion dirham with an underlying earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation margin of around 10% to 11%. One of the corrective steps under way in Abu Dhabi is the rebranding of these operations to Mediclinic. Meintjes expects the rebranding project to be implemented during 2017 and 2018. Responding to analysts’ queries about the cost of the rebranding exercise, Meintjes said the cost would not be huge as this was largely limited to new signage. Another analyst asked if it would not have been more cost-effective for Mediclinic to have built its own private hospital network in Abu Dhabi rather than buying an existing business where there was no goodwill. Meintjes defended the decision to acquire AlNoor, saying he was still confident the decision to acquire an existing footprint in Abu Dhabi would pay off. "Part of the medicine will be the rebranding [of the private hospital network]." Another tricky issue that Mediclinic needs to stitch up in Abu Dhabi is the number of doctors leaving group hospitals. Meintjes said that in the 12 months leading up to the Al Noor combination a significant number of doctors departed from the business. "This trend continued into the start of the current financial year." He said that during the year in Abu Dhabi, Mediclinic had carried out clinical performance reviews and implemented a strategic recruitment programme of doctors. "We are making good progress, leveraging off the experience of the Dubai recruitment team, with some 90 new doctor appointments made in the Middle East since April 2016 and a further 60 doctors in the process of recruitment." Meintjes conceded that the extended recruitment process, combined with the realignment of certain business and operational practices, had resulted in a further short-term impact on patient and service volumes. Despite the operational hitches, Meintjes said significant progress had been made integrating the Al Noor and Mediclinic operations into a single business unit. "Annualised cost synergies of 75-million dirham are expected to be realised during the current financial year."