Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan’s budget speech offered very limited evidence to suggest radical transformation, particularly in terms of land reform, is about to be accelerated. Agricultural Chamber of Commerce CEO John Purchase said on Thursday that spending on agriculture, rural development and land reform will only increase 2% from just less than R26bn in 2016-17 to R26.5bn in 2017-18. It will increase to about R30bn in 2019-20. Of this amount, the budget allocated for land redistribution has declined 3%, from R1.23bn in 2016-17 to R1.19bn in 2017-18. The allocation for restitution increased 2.5%, from R3.17bn in 2016-17 to R3.25bn in 2017-18. The government has been hard-pressed to complete the land-reform programme amid concerns by some farmer organisations and opposition parties that people could soon resort to "Zimbabwe-style land grabs". However, President Jacob Zuma said last week the land-reform issue will be tackled within the parameters of the law. He said that one of the reasons the land-reform project had been tardy was that the government had chosen to use the willing-buyer, willing-seller principle that in many cases had resulted in "the state having to pay large sums of money to acquire land". Purchase said: "Of particular interest to agriculture and agribusiness is the extent to which the budget speech reflected the new emphasis on ‘radical economic transformation’ and inclusive growth, vis-à-vis, land reform (redistribution and restitution). "In light of the fiscal discipline required by Gordhan, there is limited evidence to suggesta new radical transformation agenda in light of the budget allocations outlined in his speech." Purchase said the budget seemed to offer some scope for improved sector transformation through farmer support and development, with the budget allocation for this programme rising 10% to R3.79bn, from R3.43bn in the previous year. "So, while the message of radical economic transformation has been emphasised, both in the budget and the state of the nation address, it appears the sector will likely experience more of the same. "In that sense, in the medium term — where budget allocations for agriculture, rural development and land reform are set to increase by an average annual rate of 4.7% up to 2019-20 — we can expect a modest pace in the sector’s transformation. "Obviously, transformation of the sector is not incumbent on the public sector only and the private sector also needs to implement sustainable transformation, including through the long-awaited new AgriBEE Sector Code. "But to transform sustainably economic growth is an absolute imperative, as the finance minister correctly emphasised," Purchase said.