MTN’s share price lost nearly 7% to R110 on Wednesday morning after it warned shareholders it expected to report a basic and headline loss per share for the year to end-December. The cellphone network operator did not give a range of the loss it expected to report on March 2, but said a further trading statement would be issued in due course. It said the loss was mainly due to the fine it received in Nigeria for failing to identify subscribers. The fine would drag its basic and headline earnings per share down by about R4.74 — the same amounted given in its interim results. MTN reported headline earnings per share (HEPS) of R12.04 and basic earnings per share (EPS) of R7.46 in its 2015 final results. Besides the 330-billion naira (about R14bn) fine it agreed in June to pay over three years, MTN said it also suffered "foreign exchange losses in a number of operations, losses from joint ventures and associates, additional depreciation resulting from prior hyperinflation adjustments in MTN Irancell, the Zakhele Futhi tax and share-based payment charges and professional fees incurred in respect of the settlement of the Nigerian regulatory fine and planned listing". In August, MTN reported an interim headline loss per share of R2.71 from the matching period’s headline earnings of R6.51. MTN said in its interim results the fine contributed R4.74 to its loss. Professional services fees it paid to negotiate the fine down cost shareholders 73c per share. Losses from its investments in tower companies contributed R1.36 to its interim headline loss and e-commerce venture Rocket cost 27c per share. Forex losses contributed a R1.35 per share loss during the first half of its financial year. In Wednesday’s statement, MTN said its financial results were "further expected to be negatively impacted by the underperformance of MTN Nigeria and MTN SA in the first half of 2016". "MTN Nigeria’s first-half performance was impacted by the disconnection of 4.5-million subscribers in February 2016 in compliance with the Nigerian Communications Commission subscriber registration requirements. The withdrawal of regulatory services, which was resolved in May 2016, the weak economy and the depreciation of the naira against the dollar also negatively impacted MTN Nigeria’s performance. "Consolidated results in rand terms from Nigeria were affected by the weaker naira in the second half of the year. The disappointing results from MTN SA in the first six months, were largely due to the poor postpaid performance," the company said in the trading statement.