The palace of literature that Exclusive Books has created with its bold venture in Hyde Park could soon be named the International Bookstore of the Year. The branch is short-listed in the London Book Fair International Excellence Awards for its brave and expensive experiment, which blends an enormous bookstore with a coffee bar, a stylish restaurant and shelves stocking high-class goodies such as exotic scarves and leather slippers. It sounds bullish to expand a bookstore when electronic devices could make physical books redundant, but bookshops aren’t dying, says Exclusive Books CEO Benjamin Trisk. "So many people say to me you just can’t replace the feel of a book. They say, ‘I used to consume on the Kindle and I don’t anymore, I don’t even know where it is in the house’, because there’s nothing like the texture of a book." Downloads of electronic books are in decline, while sales of physical books are up for the first time in eight or nine years in the UK and US, Trisk says. That’s not the case in SA, however, where the high cost of books is an added challenge. But since Trisk took over three years ago, Exclusive Books’ sales are up significantly. At first this compact man appears somewhat crusty, with a "don’t suffer fools" attitude that implies you just might be one. But he opens up, cracks a few dry quips and later admits with a puzzled expression that people seem afraid of him. He has hawk eyes, calling over the barista to clean a table I hadn’t noticed is dirty and spotting that a certain book isn’t displayed prominently despite the author being in the news. Trisk took over in 2013 when Times Media sold Exclusive Books to a consortium that included him and investor Mark Barnes. "It hadn’t had people at the helm who really were passionate about books, but it did have a very good staff and we believed it to be a viable business that needed some tender loving care. It needed someone with knowledge," he says. "This is the most complex retail environment you can find. We have 70,000 titles. If you walk into a supermarket there are 4,000 items. "That’s the difference. That’s the order of magnitude. The complexity of knowing your stock, ordering and reordering is quite humungous." Another problem is that people often wander in, sit down and read a book or a magazine and put it back on the shelf without buying — especially at Exclusive in Hyde Park, which has a coffee bar with long reading tables and staff who do not shoo readers away. "I make it easy for people to abuse me but I don’t really care," Trisk jokes. "Part of the philosophy behind the store is that it should be a hangout, a meeting place for conversation, because books get produced because there’s a conversation taking place in someone’s mind." If someone who walks into a bookstore doesn’t buy a book, it may be they can’t afford one. "But why should I tell them they can’t access these beautiful things?" Trisk asks. "And when they have the money they are more likely to come here, because this is where the experience has been best." The EB Social Kitchen and Bar was built where there used to be a car park for the mall. "I wanted something that carried on the conversation," Trisk says. "The food is superb. I’ve got a chef who has worked in three Michelin-starred restaurants in France and London." The chef, Russell Armstrong, creates innovative dishes in the 130-seat restaurant, which is busy on Thursdays and weekends and does "as well as any other" on weekdays. Running a bookshop and running a restaurant demand different skills and perhaps juggling both at once isn’t playing to his strengths, I suggest. "This is my strength," Trisk replies, waving at the restaurant. "I’ve never done it before, but why shouldn’t it be?" The designers were the architects Silvio Rech and Lesley Carstens, but Trisk was always close by, influencing the look. He chose every mismatched dining chair and a couple of cheap tables from junk shops to create a homely atmosphere. It was fun but very stressful, he adds. "I was here for three months at 4.30 in the morning six days a week to make sure the job was getting done." Trisk can’t say whether the restaurant is financially viable because he can’t judge what effect it has on book sales. "Let’s imagine I didn’t have this. Am I going to do the same amount of book sales? My own verdict is, never." If he didn’t take such risks then customers might prefer to stay at home, order books online and get them delivered. He has noticed that the restaurant and bookshop attract many black families, which leads to the question why there’s no section in the shop for books in African languages. "There’s such a paucity of books published in vernacular. It’s a real problem and a chicken-and-egg situation. Publishers say there’s no demand, and customers say they can’t find any books," Trisk says. "What the Book Development Council in this country should be doing is saying to authors ‘write in your home language and we will do an English translation where we think the book is of adequate standard’. "We’re seeing pan-African readers in greater numbers demanding both fiction and nonfiction and there are just not enough." Children’s section sales are growing by double digits, however, because parents are concerned about the intrusion of electronic devices into their children’s lives. But it’s not happening enough, Trisk says. "The thing with kids is that you have to give them the reading habit very early. That means parents need to read to their children and they don’t." He recalls going to St John’s College when his son was a pupil and telling them he didn’t think they were reading enough Shakespeare. The teachers said other parents asked why they still taught Shakespeare because it was irrelevant these days. "Go and listen to anyone with half a brain who gives a wonderful talk. They give that wonderful talk because they’ve read so much. "Parents don’t understand that reading is the quiet and silent accretion of knowledge." Exclusive is short-listed for the London Book Fair award against Paris’s legendary Shakespeare and Company and Time Out Bookstore in New Zealand. Stiff competition, Trisk says, because Shakespeare and Company has an incredible reputation. "They have a kind of garret at the top of the building where any itinerant, vaguely literary person can go and sleep." But he’s not daunted for long: "In terms of look and style and texture there is nothing close to this in the entire world," he says, waving his hand around. The winner will be announced on March 14. Trisk is not sure what the prize is. "I hope it’s a lot of money, but I doubt it," he smiles. "I think it’s kudos. But what would mean more than that is the simple recognition of what we are doing in this country and of the manager, Lauren Watson. "I’d never have built this store without Lauren, who died of a brain tumour last year. The prize would be recognition of her."