New York — US and global factors have led market participants to think there is a greater possibility of a Federal Reserve interest-rate hike in March. Markets were pricing in a 52% probability on Monday, up from less than 40% last week. Where this probability assessment goes next depends increasingly on a single data point, which could also fuel a gradual reorientation of the Fed’s approach to monetary policy and how the US central bank interacts with markets. Market expectations of a March rate hike were boosted by Robert Kaplan, president of the Federal Reserve of Dallas and a voting member of the Fed’s open market committee. Referring to Fed signals that it would probably raise rates "sooner rather than later," Kaplan said this would imply a hike in the "near future". He based this on prospects for stronger economic growth in 2017 and the need to lower the risk of monetary policy falling behind the inflation curve. Rate sentiment was further influenced by signals from the White House that President Donald Trump’s first budget would include a substantial and "historic" increase in defence spending of $54bn. Global conditions are also playing a role in the re-evaluation. Two-year German government bonds have found their footing, at least for now, alleviating downward pressures on US yields. Nonetheless, the higher probability of a Fed hike still doesn’t make it a done deal, and rightly so; and this is not primarily due to heightened political risk in Europe. Judging from the insights of Fed chairwoman Janet Yellen and some of her colleagues, the Fed would need stronger wage-growth data to feel comfortable about a rates hike, the third time in 10 years. So the February jobs report, to be released March 10, will have an important, if not deterministic, influence on what the Fed decides on March 14-15. A green light from the wage data would do more than significantly raise the probability of a March rate hike. It would also enable the Fed to slowly move from its tactical posture to a more strategic one. Since the 2008 global financial crisis took the Fed by surprise it has followed a highly "data dependent" approach to policy making. That with the unusual recovery and growth/inflation forecasting errors undermined the Fed’s understanding of the economy’s behaviour and the effectiveness of its analytical models, especially historically calibrated ones. The Fed became a hostage not just to high-frequency economic data (and the accompanying "noise" including some large revisions), but also to markets. Rather than lead markets, the central bank fell into the habit of following their short-term orientation. Should the next jobs report open the way, the Fed could return to a more proactive strategic stance. In addition to countering excessive short-termism, this new orientation could provide a new policy anchor, especially when other elements of policies go from agonising paralysis (due to congressional gridlock) to potentially significant change as will likely be illustrated by Trump’s speech to a joint session of Congress on Tuesday evening. •This column does not necessarily reflect the opinion of Bloomberg or its owners. El-Erian is a Bloomberg View columnist, Allianz chief economic adviser and chairman of the US President’s Global Development Council. Bloomberg