The government is mulling over the introduction of a voluntary severance package offer to further reduce its 1.32-million staff headcount and bloated wage bill. Employee costs make up 36% of the national budget, leaving less for spending on other critical items. National Treasury director-general Lungisa Fuzile told reporters on Wednesday that the Treasury and the Department of Public Administration had launched a process to review existing provisions for voluntary severance packages. "We have got a legal framework that exists now which allows voluntary severance packages. We are looking at that framework to determine whether it is adequate to help us achieve the objectives we want to achieve or it will need something to make it more effective," he said. Michael Sachs, head of the Treasury’s budget office, said on the sidelines: "We don’t have an explicit [reduction] target, but the budget resources imply a moderate reduction in headcount over the medium term." The public service is decentralised with about 200 different employers. Each employer will have to consider its budget and its headcount and its personnel objectives "and arrive at conclusion about how to manage this", Sachs said. The government offered severance packages during the 1990s for staff, but a new offer would be different, he said. The previous offer was linked to fiscal consolidation and transition and finding an exit strategy for old-order bureaucrats to make room for transformation objectives. "We don’t want to approach it like that … it had some problems. People would take the package and then they’d be working back in the public service. It was quite expensive," Sachs said. The three-year wage agreement signed with public service unions in 2015 included a 7% wage increase, with inflation plus 1% for the next two years. However, when benefits were included, the wage bill rose an additional 2% a year. With the deal due to expire in March 2018, negotiations for a new agreement are to start later this year. Sachs said that if the outcome of the new negotiations was an inflation-related agreement "there wouldn’t be need for any attrition on headcount" and a better balance of spending in the budget could be attained. Public sector headcount across provinces has dropped 2.8% since April last year after pressure from the Treasury. This resulted in a decline in the proportion of expenditure on personnel in provincial budgets to 59.8% in the current financial year from 60.4% a year before. But some national departments were struggling to stick to employee budget limits. "Preliminary indications are that most are on track to stay within compensation ceilings," Treasury said in the 2017 budget review. The 2017 budget proposes shrinking the limit for compensation in national departments further to R437m in the 2017-18 year, but lifting it to R497m in the outer year of the medium-term framework. Although the government’s overall spending growth is to slow over the next three years, average growth in spending on employee remuneration is expected to remain high at 7.2% a year over the period. Compensation is to remain at 35.5% of consolidated spending over the medium term. The revised estimate for compensation in the current fiscal year is R512.2m and this is estimated to rise to R550.4m in the new year.