There is still no plan place to pay social grant recipients after end-March, and neither Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini nor Sassa CEO Thokozani Magwaza pitched up to explain why to Parliament’s standing committee on public accounts (Scopa) on Tuesday. Representatives from the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) admitted to Scopa that Sassa did not have an alternative plan in place to continue paying grants to 17-million South Africans when 'the contract of Net1 subsidiary Cash Paymaster Services (CPS) expires on March 31. Sassa programme head Zodwa Mvulane told Scopa negotiations with CPS would begin on Wednesday to extend the current arrangement, with an increase in CPS’s service fee. The DA pointed out that according to CPS, talks were already under way. Furore over CEO Media reports on Tuesday morning said Sassa CEO Thokozani Magwaza had been suspended. He was not at Scopa’s hearing in Parliament, but other representatives said he took sick leave on Friday evening and that National Development Agency head Vuyelwa Nhlapo was appointed acting CEO on Tuesday morning. When contacted on Tuesday morning, Magwaza told Business Day he knew nothing about being suspended and referred questions to the ministry. “I do not know anything about suspension, so I am not in a position to comment on a suspension that I am not aware of,” he said. “It has been said that the minister has suspended me, I think the ministry are the right people to answer to that because I am on sick leave.” He said he had been booked off work for the week. The Star newspaper reported that Magwaza was facing suspension because he defied Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini. According to the report, Magwaza allegedly wrote to South African Post Office (Sapo) chief Mark Barnes requesting that the struggling parastatal take over the distribution of social grants when the Cash Paymaster Services (CPS) contract expires. Magwaza told Bloomberg he had done nothing wrong in approaching Sapo. "In terms of the law, I am allowed to negotiate with other government agencies," he said on Tuesday. “As a CEO, I have to have a back-up plan in case something were to go wrong with the CPS contract.” Scopa’s members were annoyed that Magwaza had not appeared before the committee, with some even suggesting the absence was an attempt to avoid accountability. Sticking with CPS Despite a Constitutional Court judgment ruling that the contract awarded to CPS was irregular, Sassa wants to extend it by one year from April 1. However, Dlamini has insisted no formal negotiations have started with CPS. The minister has also rejected the Treasury recommendation that Sassa effect the payment of social grants after March 31 by using bank accounts. Dlamini also did not show up before the Scopa hearing. However, she was in the precinct of Parliament as part of a briefing by the Cabinet’s social cluster of ministers. After attempts to get information from the Sassa delegation proved unsuccessful, Scopa member for the ANC Mnyamezeli Booi said the committee needed to summon the minister to the hearing. The committee eventually grilled Mvulane on the latest developments regarding the CPS contract. 'Gun to Treasury's head' Mvulane told the committee that the only sustainable option Sassa had was to pursue a new contract with the same service provider, thus extending the current arrangement. She also mentioned a possible service fee increase payable to CPS, from R16 to about R25. She said the agency and department would not approach the courts to have a previous ruling on the contract reviewed, but to file a supplementary report on the matter. When she said Sassa would begin negotiating a new arrangement with CPS on Wednesday, DA member Tim Brauteseth raised the contents of a shareholders’ meeting where Net 1 CEO Serge Belamant suggested the agency had had extensive discussions on a new arrangement. Brauteseth told Mvulane that Sassa’s actions were akin to holding a gun to Treasury’s head and expecting the fiscus to absorb the risk of the decision or face “a ticking time bomb” should the social grant payment system collapse. Sassa issued a statement on Tuesday morning calling reports of Magwaza’s suspension “fake news”. It said Thamo Mzobe was acting CEO until Magwaza’s return. With Bloomberg