The Office of the Public Protector and the Human Rights Commission, two of the country’s most prominent chapter nine institutions, have backed the Extension of Security of Tenure Amendment Bill, saying it will protect farm dwellers and workers’ rights. The bill seeks to prevent evictions and to create stability in farming communities. In 2011, Parliament heard that just more than 1-million farm workers and dwellers had been evicted or displaced between 1994 and 2004. In their submission to Parliament’s rural development and land reform portfolio committee on Tuesday, officials from the Office of the Public Protector said the bill would contribute to protecting farm dwellers and workers’ rights. However, they expressed concern that the legal paradigm was adversarial and could undermine social relations, a crucial element in the sustainable resolution of any dispute between parties. The bill suggests the government assist with legal representation in cases where farm dwellers face unlawful eviction. The bill also provides for compulsory mediation before an eviction dispute is referred to the courts. Under current legislation, mediation — or the use of any other dispute-resolution mechanism — is not an enforceable requirement. The Human Rights Commission had recommended the development of an adjudication system to deal with disputes. Officials from the commission welcomed the provision in the bill that ensures that no eviction proceedings are initiated in court prior to mediation. The commission officials also said the Department of Justice, along with the Legal Aid Board and the Judicial Education Institute, should be given a mandate to promote access to justice and other administrative rights of evicted farm dwellers. It was also imperative to put in place a statutory provision for temporary emergency shelter and services for people displaced from farms. South African Police Service officials welcomed the bill, especially the provision for compulsory mediation, saying this would minimise tension. The University of the Western Cape-based Institute for Poverty, Land and Agrarian Studies welcomed the bill but noted enforcement as a major area of failure. The institute’s Ruth Hall said the bill created opportunities for occupiers to acquire long-term rights to land. Occupiers were entitled to apply for, but were not guaranteed, grants to purchase land. Farm dwellers could use the grants to upgrade their rights on the land they occupied through subdivision and purchase of a portion of a farm, as long as the owner agreed to sell, or to seek long-term tenure security through the purchase of alternative land off the farm, said Hall.