The Black Business Council (BBC) has confirmed that Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan accused the lobby group of trying to capture the Treasury. In a tense meeting at the National Economic Development and Labour Council (Nedlac), Gordhan also accused the council of representing the interests of a single family, believed to be the Guptas, without providing names. Gordhan was supposed to have an audience with the council and Business Unity SA (Busa) at Nedlac on Friday as part of post-budget engagements, an annual event. But the meeting turned sour when the council tore into Gordhan, accusing him of tabling a budget that fell short of President Jacob Zuma’s promise of radical economic transformation in his earlier state of the nation address. The council has agreed to meet the Treasury to discuss the way forward. Nedlac spokeswoman Kim Jurgensen refused on Monday to comment on "the drama" on Friday, but the Treasury delegation was left dumbfounded outside the Nedlac building when council office-bearers left hastily, prompting the cancellation of a post-meeting briefing. The Treasury declined to comment on Monday. Asked if Gordhan had made the accusation, council general secretary George Sebulela said: "Yes, but our main disagreement was on the meaning of radical economic transformation. "We still stand on the position presented by the president on radical transformation. We raised those issues." Council officials left the Nedlac building hurriedly on Friday while senior Treasury staff were left stunned and remarked how this was the first time business had spoken against the budget. The BBC said in a statement: "Over the past two decades, the Treasury has failed to champion the cause of radical economic transformation." The BBC expressed concern there was no mention of practical programmes to implement radical transformation. But Busa president Jabu Mabuza welcomed Gordhan’s budget, saying it had touched on creating inclusive growth for all South Africans. "We are pleased that the finance minister sees business as a key partner to unlock growth and grow small to medium enterprises to alleviate unemployment and inequity," said Mabuza. The BBC’s Jimmy Manyi said Busa and the council were "poles apart".