The body intended to keep public servants accountable says it has fallen victim to a bad government decision as the Department of Public Works placed the institution in an "unfit building" in Pretoria and the accompanying health hazards now leave it vulnerable to lawsuits from employees. This was revealed by the Public Service Commission (PSC) during a briefing to Parliament’s portfolio committee on public service, administration, monitoring and evaluation on the commission’s second-and third-quarter performance for the 2016-17 financial year. PSC chairman Ben Mthembu told the committee the Department of Public Works had placed the commission in a building in central Tshwane that had unsafe air. "Public Works have a serious problem. The building the department gave us in the CBD of Pretoria is old and not up to standard. Officials have fallen sick and upon being checked, doctors have said the sickness is attributable to the air in the building," said Mthembu. He said PSC staff began asking for permission to work from home because of the conditions at the building. He said he worried that staff would start litigating against the commission over the working conditions. "Applications from staff may flood in to work from home, which we cannot cope with. There is a possibility that we may be sued by our employees and that will have serious financial implications," said Mthembu. DA committee member Sejamotopo Motau urged the PSC to seek assistance from the Department of Health to ensure commission staff were not working in a place that posed occupational hazard. "You have a sick-building syndrome. What you need to do is get hold of the Department of Health. Use the power that you have. Do not allow people to get away with things that are not acceptable," said Motau. Public Works spokesman Thami Mchunu told Business Day he was unaware of the PSC’s predicament but said the commission was welcome to escalate the issue with the department. He could not guarantee a response to Business Day’s queries yesterday. PSC director-general Dovhani Mamphiswana said the commission was on track to meet 61% of its targets in the second and third quarter of 2016-17. He said 78% of the 580 grievances lodged with the commission were finalised in this period.