Defending champion Andy Birkett was in a league of his own as he won the three-day Dusi Canoe Marathon from Pietermaritzburg to Durban on Saturday in 8h 32min 55sec.His fourth straight win and seventh overall in eight years of paddling, places the 26-year-old KwaZulu-Natal ace joint second with "Dusi Duke" Martin Dreyer on the all-time list of most wins behind the late Graeme Pope-Ellis, who won 15 titles.Euro Steel&rsquo;s Birkett, who completed his first Dusi at the age of 13, led from day one and increased his lead on the final two stages to cross the finishing line at the Blue Lagoon more than 20 minutes ahead of runner-up Sbonelo Khwela."The win was special because of the tough conditions, especially on days two and three," said Birkett."But overall, [I had] a solid performance. I think I handled the pressure that comes with being the defending champion better than I expected."Euro Steel/Red Bull&rsquo;s Khwela was second for his best placing yet. He had high hopes of challenging for the K1 title, but conceded the better man won."Andy stole the show &hellip; I was more than happy to play second fiddle to one of the legends of the race," he said."I came into the race with solid pre-Dusi form and gave it my best shot. I was in it to win it, but the wheels came off on day two. I lost energy and fell off the hot pace being set by Andy."But I came back well on the final day and managed to overhaul Hank McGregor who started out in second place. To be ahead of him at the finish leaves me feeling chuffed."The local from Shongweni says he will not stop trying."Next year&rsquo;s race is a K2 event and I still have to find a partner. Then comes 2019 and I&rsquo;m going to go flat-out for the win," Khwela said."I&rsquo;m going to analyse where I went wrong this time round and look to see where Andy was strong, take that info and see where I need to improve and then start my preparations," Khwela said.In 2010, Khwela made a name for himself when he teamed up with Thomas Ngidi to win the Non-Stop one-day Dusi &mdash; a race he has often won.As for Euro Steel/Kajak Centre&rsquo;s McGregor, it was a tough assignment he happily undertook knowing that his chances of a second K1 title were not great due to all the portages."I think we ran a half-marathon over the three stages, and that hurt my cause."We were sold a dummy by not having the promised water release on the final leg. So, here we had to run 17km in 37&deg; heat with the boat. Not many paddlers were happy about that," said McGregor, who finished fourth behind Thulani Mbanjwa."I had friends in the medic tents needing drips for dehydration after the race and many others went to hospital," he said."All the finishers certainly accomplished something and fully deserved their medals. That&rsquo;s the Dusi for you."Abby Solms notched up her first Dusi in the women&rsquo;s race in 10h 16min 03sec.Christie Mackenzie was nearly 50 minutes behind in second place, while Alex Adie completed the podium.