When investors think about JSE-listed companies that suffered from the pound’s plunge after the Brexit vote, they tend to think of Brait, Capital & Counties and Intu. Grocery chain Spar slumped 5.2% to R174 on Tuesday after reminding investors it too entered the UK market by acquiring the acquiring the Irish franchise of its parent group. Although its Irish business increased Christmas sales by 1.5% measured in euros, it suffered a 2.6% sales decline measured in rand. Spar’s trading update for the 13 weeks to end-December included its Swiss acquisitions for the first time, and investors appeared to have been expecting a better than 16.9% jump in the group’s sales to R25.6bn. The retailer’s South African operations grew sales 5.8%, dragged down by its hardware chain Build It. Excluding Build It, South African sales increased by 6.2%, with internally measured price inflation of about 8.3%. The group’s liquor sales remained robust in SA, with sales growth exceeding 11.3%, Spar said in its trading update on Tuesday. Spar led the JSE’s food and drug retailers index down 0.74%. The broader all share index managed to halt three trading days of losses by showing a small gain of 0.06% on Tuesday. Brait fell 3.79% to R77.45 on Tuesday, less than half the R164 it was trading at in June before the UK’s Brexit vote. Disappointing results from Disney and other US companies may halt Wall Street’s rally — the Dow Jones Industrial and Nasdaq indices both gained 0.19% on Tuesday. December’s box office take for the Star Wars franchise failed to impress Walt Disney investors on Tuesday, sending its stock down 0.56% to $108.39 ahead of the JSE’s opening on Wednesday morning. Disney reported its December quarter revenue declined 3% to $14.8bn after Rogue One: A Star Wars Story failed to match the ticket sales of the previous year’s The Force Awakens. Asian markets trading ahead of the JSE’s opening on Wednesday morning appeared more preoccupied with concerns over France’s election on April 23 and other European elections in 2017.