Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini confirmed on Wednesday that the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) would continue to use Cash Paymaster Services (CPS) for the distribution of social grants after March 31. Dlamini was presenting her much-anticipated progress report to the parliamentary portfolio committee just hours before Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan delivered the budget speech, which made no reference to the turmoil around the grant distribution contract. In 2017-18, R142bn in social grants will be distributed to 11-million recipients on behalf of 17-million beneficiaries. It represents one of the single largest items in the budget. Dlamini said Sassa would negotiate terms and conditions for a new CPS contract, which is expected to last for up to two years. However, although Sassa has sent a tentative letter to CPS about an extension of its services, there have still been no formal discussions between the two parties. In her presentation, Dlamini said Sassa would approach the Constitutional Court and then apply to the Treasury for approval of a deviation from its procurement requirements. The minister says the Treasury has already indicated that it would consider the request favourably, but only if the court acceded to Sassa’s request for approval to continue using CPS. In 2014, the court ruled that the contract between Sassa and CPS was invalid, but suspended this invalidity for the duration of the contract. Serge Belamant, CEO of CPS holding company Net1 UEPS, has said he will not consider an extension to the existing invalid contract, but will only look at a new one approved by the court. Belamant says he does not want to be faced with the same legal challenges that had dogged the current contract. Although Sassa was at first advised, on the basis of a report it presented to the court last November, that the court had discharged its supervisory role, it was subsequently advised to file a supplementary report to the court that would "clarify the drastic changes to its plan from the one filed in November", said the presentation. The new report to the court would include the terms and conditions of the new contract with CPS. Belamant has said he will look to secure higher payment for any new contract on the grounds that CPS’s fees have been fixed for the past five years. Given that CPS is regarded as the only party with the capacity to distribute grants after March 31, Belamant appears to be in a strong negotiating position. However, the Treasury is keen to cut back on the distribution costs, which it says represent 5% of the total cost of social grants. The world best is 3%. Sassa has asked the Treasury to form part of the negotiating team. Meanwhile, Sassa says it is continuing with its efforts to award a new tender. It issued a request for information on December 9 and had received 18 responses by the February 10 closing date. The responses were received from banks, private companies and government entities, Sassa says. Most of the major banks have said they had not responded to the request for information. Sassa is also planning to enhance its communication with beneficiaries. This is seen as a bid to avoid chaos ahead of the critical April 1 payment date. There will also be a need to minimise the scope for fraud being perpetrated on unsuspecting grant recipients during a period of considerable uncertainty.