South African Revenue Service (SARS) boss Jonas Makwakwa has undergone a "disciplinary process" in the past two weeks, Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan said on Wednesday. Makwakwa — second in charge at SARS — was suspended in September 2016 after R1.3m in suspicious and unusual amounts were identified to have entered his bank accounts and that of his girlfriend, SARS employee Kelly-Ann Elskie. Elskie was also suspended after the Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC) revealed she had been caught on camera depositing large amounts of cash into her personal account. There were also allegations that Makwakwa was directly responsible for organising Elskie’s appointment to a key position in SARS’s high court litigation unit tasked with dealing with the most high-profile and sensitive cases. Business Day understands the disciplinary process against Makwakwa was not linked to the allegations around the transactions but involved another transgression by the SARS boss linked to his interference in a taxpayer matter. The suspicious transactions were identified by the FIC and a report was handed to SARS commissioner Tom Moyane in May 2016. Moyane sat on it until September when media reports exposed the transactions. After it was publicised, Moyane suspended Makwakwa and appointed legal firm Hogan Lovells to probe the matter. Addressing the media in Parliament, Gordhan said he had been informed that Makwakwa had undergone some "disciplinary process" in the last fortnight but the minister said he had "not been privileged to be given the information of the outcome of that". According to two sources with knowledge of the disciplinary process, Makwakwa had contacted a SARS employee while on suspension and sought to intervene in a tax matter on behalf of Durban billionaires Shauwn and S’bu Mpisane. According to media reports in December 2016, the pair were declared "factually insolvent" by SARS in a court application requesting that their estatebe sequestrated. Makwakwa allegedly set up a meeting with the official dealing with the matter which was attended by a tax representative of Shauwn Mpisane. The official later became nervous and alerted his superior, who asked for a complete report on the matter. The report was then handed to Moyane, which led to the disciplinary process. It was unclear what the charges were but Makwakwa had allegedly violated the terms of his suspension by contacting a SARS employee. On the FIC matter, it is understood the investigation has stalled and that Makwakwa has claimed he obtained the money from a "stokvel and taxi business". Hogan Lovells has in the interim appointed a firm to conduct a forensic audit of the transactions, sources confirmed on Wednesday. The outcome of the disciplinary process is also unclear — SARS spokesman Sandile Mamela said the tax authority had a 24-hour turnaround time to respond to media queries. *In an earlier version of this story we reported that the meeting was attended by Shauwn Mpisane. The meeting was in fact attended by a representative of Mpisane's. We regret the error.