The cost of the state of the nation address (Sona) for 2017 reached a staggering R11m, the DA claimed on Sunday. This year’s Sona attracted controversy before it even took place after it was announced that the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) would be deployed around the parliamentary precinct from February 5-10 at a cost of about R200,000, to "maintain law and order". DA chief whip John Steenhuisen said on Sunday that replies to questions he had submitted immediately following the state of the nation address revealed that the cost of the 2017 edition had reached "an astonishing R11m". "On 2 February, secretary to Parliament Gengezi Mgidlana told media that R4m had been budgeted for the event. However, replies to written questions to the ministers of police and public works revealed that their departments spent a further R4.085m and R2.7m, respectively," said Steenhuisen. He said the Department of State Security avoided answering the question, "as is their habit, claiming that their enormous deployment to the event ‘came from the normal operational budget of the [State Security] Agency’." The DA would submit an application in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act to get a clear picture of state security resources dedicated to the event, and why, said Steenhuisen. He said adding the R200,000 spent on deploying 441 members of the SANDF "to maintain law and order during the opening of Parliament" reveals that this year’s state of the nation address cost just under R11m. "This eye-watering amount could have been better spent on initiatives to create jobs, provide skills and training or on education for young South Africans. "The ‘hidden’ cost of Sona not only reveals how much the increasing securitisation and militarisation of the event is costing South Africans, it also makes a mockery of Mgidlana’s comments that Sona is ‘about the president and members of the public interacting with the speech being made’. The sad reality is that Sona is no longer accessible to ordinary members of the public; however, they are expected to stump up more and more every year for a compromised president facing a hostile Parliament," said Steenhuisen. He said the DA would keep investigating the real cost of Sona 2017 and, once calculated, reveal how many millions was spent on "having a paranoid president deliver a speech to his own caucus". Parliament said on Sunday that it rejected as "selective analysis, one-sided and misleading, the allegations that Parliament has spent over R11m" in organising and staging the state of the nation address. "Premier annual events held in Cape Town like Sona pump millions of rand into the economy of the City of Cape Town and the province of the Western Cape, a fact that is regrettably often not acknowledged by critics of Parliament. A factual study in this regard is being conducted to expose the actual statistical economic impact, including tourism, economic development and job creation," Parliament said in statement. It said it had made a commitment over a number of years to progressively reduce expenditure on the state of the nation address through more prudent management and had been succeeding as it reached a R4m mark in 2017. "Parliament is confident that when all bills are paid and everything reconciled it may be even far less than the target. Parliament has ensured that the high quality and delivery standards of this ... event in its corporate events calendar are maintained and improved."