Prioritisation was the name of the game in Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan’s 2017 budget, says ANC treasurer-general Zweli Mkhize. The ANC is divided over support for Treasury and Gordhan, with those aligned to President Jacob Zuma attacking him on the eve of his budget speech in Parliament. The ANC Youth League called for his removal and the ANC Women’s League blamed Gordhan for the slow pace of transformation in SA. Zuma complained at the ANC’s lekgotla last month that Treasury was an obstacle to the party’s radical economic transformation programme. Mkhize said Gordhan had delivered a "good speech" in a difficult economic climate — it was "bold and frank". He welcomed procurement reforms targeting small businesses and the focus on transformation, particularly to ensure efficient service-delivery programmes. He played down criticism of Gordhan by his colleagues in the Cabinet, saying that in all countries ministers demanded more funds for their portfolios. "I don’t think he could have done much more in the current economic environment," said Mkhize. "I congratulate him." He said that stimulating revenue collection was critical to improving growth. The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) welcomed the increases in social grant payments and the increase in higher education spending. However, EFF spokesman Mbuyiseni Ndlozi said that there had been no indication that the budget would "interrupt the poverty-generating colonial nature of SA’s economy". Ndlozi expressed concern that the burden of raising money to fund the budget still rested with individuals. "But corporates are still not being taxed enough … in fact corporate income tax has been decreasing over the years," Ndlozi said. Democratic Alliance finance spokesman David Maynier said the budget highlighted the need for his party’s proposal for a comprehensive spending review that would require the National Treasury — working with national departments, provinces, municipalities and state-owned entities — to review the composition of spending, the efficiency of spending and future spending priorities "We have to reprioritise expenditure to fund programmes to provide opportunities for the ‘lost generation’, which includes millions of young people who do not have jobs, or have given up looking for jobs, in SA," Maynier said. ANC alliance partner the Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu) said it appreciated the many key, progressive government commitments highlighted in the budget, but complained that it lacked a "coherent and targeted job-protection and creation plan" that would ensure all South Africans were employed. Two Cosatu-affiliated unions protested outside Parliament against Gordhan, particularly over austerity measures that curbed employment in the public service. The South African Communist Party welcomed the new top personal income tax rate of 45% for people with taxable incomes of above R1.5m and also the insistence on a progressive income tax structure. But the party said it was concerned about the effect the increased fuel levy would have on the workers and poor people who spent a significant proportion of their wages on transport. The Black Business Council (BBC), supporters of Zuma, expressed disappointment in Gordhan’s budget. "The BBC shall continue through its portfolio committees to fight for radical economic transformation war on the legislative front," it said in a statement on Wednesday.