Liberty CEO Thabo Dloti says the group has made changes to Stanlib Kenya’s management team, following operational issues in that business relating to impaired bank exposures. "Client money was invested in instruments that were exposed to second-tier banks in Kenya, which subsequently became illiquid. We’ve taken steps to make sure our business and clients are on a good footing," Dloti said. Dloti declined to comment further because the matter was still under investigation. Stanlib’s rest of Africa business posted a R97m loss for the year to end-December 2016 — a R159m decline on the year-earlier period. Alongside operational issues in Kenya, Stanlib was hard hit by the curtailment of guaranteed cash mandate business in that country, Dloti said. Seelan Gobalsamy, the group CEO of Stanlib, would head Liberty’s emerging businesses, including its expansion into the rest of Africa and Stanlib Africa, said Dloti. "We want an executive who is solely focused on growth opportunities." With the assistance of Giles Heegan, the CEO of LibFin, Gobalsamy would remain in his role at Stanlib until a replacement was found, Dloti said. Stanlib’s South African earnings fell R108m over 2016, due to muted equity market returns, lower client cash flows and outsourcing costs. Lower nonmoney market flows into Stanlib’s SA business drove net cash inflows 32% lower to R5.8bn. In the rest of Africa, insurance earnings grew 64% to R41m, with customer cash flows climbing 22.3% to R483m. During the year, three short-term insurance acquisitions were concluded in Uganda, Malawi and Botswana, and a long-term business launched in Lesotho. Growth in new business premiums was much higher in the rest of Africa than in SA, said Dloti. The group was in the advanced stages of acquiring a life licence in Nigeria. This was a long-term investment that was not expected to make a meaningful contribution to earnings in the medium term, Dloti said. Portfolio manager at Kagiso Asset Management, Justin Floor was critical of the Nigeria expansion. "Liberty’s African expansion strategy has been in the works for years and delivery remains short of the promise. Buying assets in Nigeria is fraught with risk at the best of times. That said, Standard Bank’s strength in the region has the potential to be supportive over time."