ZAR X says it is in advanced discussions with five companies interested in listing on the fledgling exchange, which was launched on Monday and settled its first trade in 10 seconds. The exchange is the first new entrant into a sector that has been dominated by the JSE for decades, and will compete with the incumbent for listings and investors. ZAR X was also in talks with restricted share schemes, such as broad-based black economic empowerment schemes, said CEO, Etienne Nel. The speed at which Monday’s sole trade — a buy order for 100 shares in agricultural group Senwes at R10.50 per share — was matched, settled and cleared demonstrated the effectiveness of ZAR X’s platform, Nel said. ZAR X used technology to create a more efficient financial market for investors and issuers, Nel said. "We are passionate about driving financial inclusion in SA’s capital markets." The exchange offered free real-time share data, such as stock prices and trades. The ZAR X publishing service (Zaps) the equivalent of the JSE’s stock exchange news service (Sens), was also freely available on its website. ZAR X’s real-time settlement is a first in SA. The JSE moved its settlement cycle from six days to four days, known as T+3 (trade plus three days), in July 2016. It said at the time that this would attract more foreign flows, as a shorter settlement cycle reduced risk since fewer unsettled trades were being made at any point in time. Petri Redelinghuys, founder of Herenya Capital Advisors, said the competition introduced by ZAR X would reduce share trading costs. It would also increase flows into financial markets and enable smaller companies to list. Senwes, which had to move its shares from an over-the-counter trading platform to a regulated exchange, was proud to be associated with ZAR X, said CEO Francois Strydom. For the six months to October 2016, Senwes delivered profit after tax of R91m, an 11.6% decrease on the previous period due to the drought. Senwes was an inexpensive stock that would benefit from drought alleviation in large parts of SA, said Andrew Vintcent, a portfolio manager at ClucasGray Asset Management. The 107-year-old group, with a market value of about R2bn — trading on a price:earnings multiple of seven — focuses on the supply of equipment, seed, storage and financial services to the agricultural sector. It stores 25% of SA’s grain output. Senwes has separately listed its majority shareholder Senwesbel, a tightly held investment business. Investors could "expect action on the double listing" in future, Strydom said, suggesting a possible collapse of Senwesbel into Senwes.