Oppenheimer aviation company Fireblade has launched an investigation into how "internal statements" about the so-called "green suitcase affair" was leaked to Gupta-owned television channel ANN7 earlier this week. Fireblade said last week "a customer who is no longer a customer", understood to be the Gupta family, had tried to load a suitcase containing "suspicious items" onto one of their aircraft last April. Several sources told Business Day and City Press the suitcase was suspected of containing diamonds. Fireblade reported the incident to the OR Tambo International Airport security cluster. The Guptas have dismissed the allegations as "fake news" and "malicious gossip". ANN7, quoting the statements, this week confirmed Fireblade staffers had spotted suspicious items when the suitcase was scanned but had identified these as "nuts". "Luggage piece number one was a big green bag filled with what seemed to be jars with different kind [sic] of nuts and wheat," Fireblade staffer Desmond Knoetse said. Fireblade security guard Daniel Molate said the suitcase was "full of suspicious items like ground nuts". However, Fireblade said on Thursday that it stood by its previous statement that it could not identify "the precise nature" of the suspicious items and that the Gupta representative had refused to allow the suitcase to be subjected to a "full examination". "We have no idea how the four Fireblade operators’ internal statements came to be in the possession of ANN7, which is something that is currently being looked into," the company said. The Oppenheimers allege in court papers the Guptas are behind the government’s refusal to grant their application to run a private customs and immigration facility at their luxury terminal at the airport, where the incident took place. They accuse the Guptas of wanting control of the facility themselves. Fireblade fired the latest salvo on Thursday in its battle with Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba and Denel, ripping into the state arms maker’s denial of a business relationship with the Guptas. Gigaba and Denel, which subleases the property to Fireblade, have vehemently denied the claims. In his latest affidavit, Fireblade director Robbie Irons said Denel had ducked the issue of its commercial relationship with the Guptas. Acting CEO Zwelakhe Ntshepe last week denied Denel "has at any time been involved in the establishment of a  business with the Gupta family". But Irons said this ignored Denel’s "indirect" business links with the Guptas. Late in 2015 Denel formed a controversial partnership with VR Laser Asia, which is registered in Hong Kong. VR Laser Asia is 100% owned by close Gupta business associate Salim Essa. Its parent company VR Laser’s shareholders include Essa, the Gupta family and President Jacob Zuma’s son Duduzane Zuma. Former Denel CEO Riaz Saloojee said he would never have approved Denel’s partnership with VR Laser Asia. "There is no denial that Denel and certain Gupta-owned and controlled entities have a joint venture, registered abroad, that deals or is intended to deal in arms in Asia," Irons said.