Pitso Mosimane has promised to play his strongest possible side on Tuesday night as the newly crowned African Super Cup winners take on Platinum Stars in another Premier Soccer League catch-up fixture, writes Mark Gleeson. "The game is key, so we are going to go with our strongest team. The league is very tight right now‚" said the Mamelodi Sundowns coach‚ whose side travel to the Royal Bafokeng Sports Palace for the match (kick-off 7.30pm). It will be the 13th Premier League fixture of the season for Sundowns — still not even halfway through their scheduled league programme — and a chance to usurp SuperSport United in fourth place in the Premiership standings. "I believe we can go on and win the league, but we’ve got to be smart‚ particularly in the games against top clubs. "We don’t have to beat the likes of Wits and Cape Town City to win the league, but we musn’t lose to them either. We need to box clever and in some games, it is not necessary to have to go toe-to-toe. It is in our own hands at this point in time‚" Mosimane said. On Saturday, Sundowns won the Super Cup with a 1-0 triumph over TP Mazembe Englebert of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Stars returned from Mozambique on Saturday where they beat UD Songo 1-0 in the second leg of the African Confederation Cup first round match. Ndumiso Mabena’s 80th-minute goal ensured a 2-0 aggregate win. "I’m happy just with the result because we managed to control the game and we did it very well, although we were missing six key players‚" said Stars coach Cavin Johnson. Sundowns will begin the defence of their African Champions League crown at home to Ugandan club Kampala Capital City Authority on March 11. SA’s three other representatives in the club competition advanced through their weekend first round ties to book matches against opposition from Egypt‚ Sudan and Uganda. Sundowns will host the first leg of their second-round tie in Pretoria with the return in Kampala on March 18 or 19. The winner then advances to the expanded Champions League group in which 16 teams will be divided into four groups of four. Wits will take on record winners Al Ahly in their second-round tie with the first leg in Cairo and the return at Bidvest Stadium. They go to Cairo hoping restrictions on crowd sizes might see authorities in Egypt move the game to Alexandria and with a restricted crowd. Platinum Stars now take on Vipers SC of Uganda. SuperSport United‚ who had a 2-1 aggregate triumph over ASSM Elgeco Plus from Madagascar on Sunday‚ meet Ahly Shendi of Sudan in the second round of the Confederation Cup. TMG Digital