London — Commodity-related sectors led European shares lower for a third consecutive session on Friday while the dollar was poised for a weekly loss as the "Trumpflation trade" lost momentum. World stocks have hit record highs, emerging markets have come back in favour and the dollar has climbed to a 14-year peak in recent weeks due to the expectation that US President Donald Trump’s economic agenda will stoke growth and inflation. New US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin took the edge off that optimism overnight when he said any policy steps by the Trump administration would probably have only a limited effect this year. The comments, made in his first televised interviews since taking office last week, suggested much work was still needed on a sweeping tax reform plan that Mnuchin called his main priority. They knocked the dollar back and it was trading down 0.2% against a basket of other major currencies at 100.82, leaving it slightly down on the week and facing its first weekly loss in three. "Mnuchin’s comments were less belligerently reflationary than they could have been, in a dollar strength context, and that probably did much of the damage [to the dollar]," said UBS Wealth Management currency strategist Geoffrey Yu in London. "But ultimately outside of the US there is reflation happening and data are looking strong, so perhaps it’s time to just take some dollar longs off the table.... We need additional information to sustain [the Trumpflation trade]." Subdued forecasts from European blue chips, including BASF and Vivendi, and a drop in mining shares following overnight declines in metals prices dragged the benchmark Stoxx 600 index down 0.3%. Shares of Standard Chartered fell more than 5% after results. London copper prices recovered slightly from their big overnight fall due to fresh doubts about Chinese demand. Three-month copper on the London Metal Exchange was up 0.8% at $5,907/tonne by 7am GMT after falling 3% in the previous session. Gold hit its highest in about three-and-a-half months on a weaker dollar and safe-haven demand. Spot gold was up 0.4% at $1,254.10/oz. Oil prices fell after US crude inventories rose for a seventh week, showing the market is still struggling to ease oversupply despite producers’ efforts to rein in output. Benchmark Brent crude oil was down 48c at $56.10 a barrel, while US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) traded at $54.06 a barrel, down 39c. Reuters