On Friday, ArcelorMittal SA and the Department of Trade and Industry said they had agreed on a deal on pricing principles for the company’s steel products, after years of negotiations. In this regard the government also indicated it would continue to review tariffs on a range of downstream products, as requested by steel producers in SA. The announcements were part of a long-running battle between SA’s largest steel maker and the government over lower input costs for infrastructure and steel beneficiation in SA. "We are extremely pleased that we have reached an agreement with government on fair pricing principles," ArcelorMittal SA CEO Wim de Klerk said. "Maintaining our licence to operate requires ArcelorMittal SA to be a transformed and responsible business — a leader in the steel industry that acknowledges its role in ensuring the long-term sustainability of the local steel sector and associated industries," he said. The group had made significant strides in advancing its transformation strategy and was committed to further developing black industrialists, De Klerk said. The downstream industry in SA would benefit from a more certain and transparent pricing mechanism, with incentives for improved efficiencies in steel production and beneficiation, ArcelorMittal SA said. The industry still wanted further safeguard protection measures over and above 10% tariffs already implemented, to protect it from cheap imports, mainly from China. The specific deal with ArcelorMittal SA was designed to allow it earn "a reasonable margin" from domestic sales, while remaining competitive and efficient. The five-year agreement had been in the pipeline since 2009, when the country’s largest steel maker failed to covert an old order mining right for a partial mining right at Kumba’s Sishen iron ore mine. This had led to legal wrangles with government. The pricing principles — which could be renewed after the initial five-year period — would exclude long steel products, unless specifically stated. Import parity pricing, which had in the past been used as the basis for ArcelorMittal SA’s domestic steel pricing, would now be based on a weighted basket price. This would be determined by the weighted average price of countries it competed against for the production of machinery and equipment, vehicles and other transport equipment. The basket included countries in the EU, Asia and the North American Free Trade Agreement. The pricing mechanism for flat steel products would be monitored quarterly by a steel task team made up of the government and primary and downstream industry representatives. The would be under the auspices of the government’s International Trade Administration Commission agency. The company had made a commitment to invest R4.6bn over five years to improve competitiveness in product lines designated for key sectors of the economy. But this was subject to feasibility in the light of market or other conditions, it said. © Business Day