Bidvest Wits crushed Ajax Cape Town 5-0 to move to the top of the log in their first football game of the year. It was a chillingly efficient performance in which the hosts were clearly galvanised by Phakamani Mahlambi’s superb showing. The rest of the team also covered itself in glory in what was a profitable night for the Clever Boys. SuperSport United will have the chance to remove Gavin Hunt’s side from the summit when they face Golden Arrows in Atteridgeville on Wednesday evening, but the healthy goal difference that Wits have accrued for themselves cannot go unnoticed. Mahlambi picked up where he left off in 2016 with a hand in both first-half goals. He was the recipient of some generous Ajax defending in the 20th minute, with his right-footed shot from just outside the box going past Jody February’s outstretched left hand. While he didn’t quite get around Bafana Bafana defender Rivaldo Coetzee, the corner he forced led to Wits’ second goal through Thulani Hlatshwayo. The towering defender powered a strong header past the helpless February from an excellent Mogakolodi Ngele corner. Ngele should have scored a third in the 43rd minute but decided shoot straight at an Ajax defender with only February to beat after Mahlambi evaded Thabo Mosadi’s attentions. Such was the strain on Ajax’s defence, Lawrence Lartey and Coetzee both received cautions from the normally overzealous Victor Gomes. The former also had the indignity of being taken off the pitch before half-time as coach Stanley Menzo reckoned it was better to end the torture. Ajax rarely threatened and when they did, the rock-solid defensive pairing of Buhle Mkhwanazi regularly snuffed out the danger. In another match on Tuesday, defensive midfielder Willard Katsande scored a goal of beauty to help Kaizer Chiefs to a deserved 3-1 win over struggling Free State Stars. With Amakhosi comfortably leading 2-0 deep into the second half, Katsande beat two Stars defenders inside the box before calmly slotting the ball beyond the reach of visiting goalkeeper Thela Ngobeni. Katsande’s goal came after Stars’ defence failed to deal adequately with a dipping corner kick from Siphiwe Tshabalala, and the win sees Amakhosi move one place to third on the log. TMG Digital