Hong Kong — The oil market is drifting in snooze mode as investors await evidence of global supply curbs aimed at easing a glut. A measure of oil volatility in January averaged the lowest in more than two years and futures in New York have been stuck between $50 and $55 a barrel since the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec) and other producing nations agreed on December 10 to reduce output. Price estimates compiled by Bloomberg show crude will average $52 during the first quarter of this year, rising to $58 in the last three months of 2017. Oil slumped to a 12-year low early in 2016 and whiplashed between bull and bear markets before firming on the supply agreement between Opec and 11 nonmembers. Signs of compliance may come from Opec’s monthly report on February 13, while the International Energy Agency will update its measure of global inventories on February 10. "When we start to see some data come through in February, it may ignite the market a little bit more, in either direction," said Daniel Hynes, an analyst in Sydney at Australia & New Zealand Banking Group. "The price isn’t really going anywhere at the moment." While the pledges have boosted prices, higher US output has raised speculation that any rally above $55 may be self-defeating. The country’s production has climbed to the highest since April and Pioneer Natural Resources, which focuses on the Permian Basin in Texas, sees the nation pumping this year near its 2015 peak. Opec and its partners are seeking to trim output by about 1.8-million barrels a day during the first six months of 2017. To monitor the cuts, Opec’s secretariat will present a report on the 17th day of each month to a committee made up of ministers from Kuwait, Russia, Algeria, Venezuela and Oman. The committee will also assess data from each country, as well as from external sources. Holding Pattern Output by Opec’s 13 members averaged 33.085-million barrels a day in December, the group said on January 18. West Texas Intermediate for March delivery traded at $52.85 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, up 4c, at 9.10am in London. Prices slid 1.7% in January, the first monthly decline in three months. The CBOE Crude Oil Volatility index, which measures expectations of price swings, averaged 31.28 in January, the lowest since October 2014. "Oil is in a bit of a holding pattern," said Mark Keenan, head of commodities research for Asia at Societe Generale in Singapore. "The market needs some time to see how the cuts play out." Bloomberg