Short-term insurer MiWay is considering legal action against a disgruntled policyholder who it believes faked a racist e-mail, making it appear a MiWay staff member wrote the e-mail. MiWay had commissioned an independent forensic investigation into the e-mail, after an internal investigation indicated it had been written by a policyholder whose claim had been rejected, CEO René Otto said. "The claim was rejected because a policy condition was not adhered to. The Ombudsman for Short-term Insurance upheld our decision." If the independent investigation confirmed its international investigation, it would decide together with its lawyers on the appropriate legal action, he said. An e-mail, which was widely circulated on social media and supposedly sent by a MiWay claims assessor, described a manager’s meeting in which it was agreed that 90% of claims made by black people would be rejected from August 1. The e-mail, which elicited widespread vitriol on social media, referred to a managers’ meeting that had allegedly taken place on a Sunday. Black South Africans said they had cancelled their policies with MiWay, encouraging others to do the same. Distancing itself from the e-mail, MiWay said: "There was also no such meeting that took place or decision to this effect. We are tracing the source of this fake content on social media and will take strong and appropriate action against anyone using our brand to disseminate offensive and derogatory comments." Social media lawyer, Emma Sadleir warned Twitter users against sharing the e-mail, saying that MiWay could definitely sue for defamation. The e-mail comes amid a barrage of suspected "fake news" that has been circulated via Twitter, among other channels, in recent months. Leaked e-mails revealing the extent of the influence of the Gupta family on the state and the Zuma family showed that UK public relations firm, Bell Pottinger, had coined phrases such as "white monopoly capital" in an attempt to curry favour for the families. Bell Pottinger, which cancelled the Gupta account, has since apologised for its social media campaign. The firm is under investigation by the Public Relations and Communications Association in the UK.