London — Oil prices firmed on Wednesday, holding near eight-week highs, as a fall in US inventories bolstered expectations that the long-oversupplied market was moving towards balance. Brent crude futures rose 30c to $50.50 a barrel by 9.59am GMT, after rallying more than 3% on Tuesday. US West Texas Intermediate futures climbed 40c to $48.29 a barrel. US crude stockpiles fell sharply last week as refineries boosted output, while petrol inventories increased and distillate stocks decreased, data from industry group the American Petroleum Institute showed on Tuesday. Crude inventories fell by 10.2-million barrels in the week ending July 21 to 487-million, more than the expected decrease of 2.6-million barrels. Data from the US Energy Information Administration on Wednesday could provide more support, with forecasts of a drop for a fourth week in a row. Tuesday’s stock draw added to hopes the long-awaited oil market rebalancing was under way. Saudi Arabia said on Monday it would limit oil exports to 6.6-million barrels a day in August, down nearly 1-million barrels a day from a year earlier. "The market has been tightening and the refinery margins are strong," said PetroMatrix MD Olivier Jakob, saying the US stock draw offered a boost to prices. "You add geopolitical risk premium for Venezuela, and you’ve got a strong market." Venezuela, an Opec member producing about 2-million barrels a day, faces deepening economic woes and protests. President Nicolas Maduro’s adversaries plan strikes to push him to abandon a weekend election. The US is considering financial sanctions to halt dollar payments for the country’s oil. Nigerian output slipped this week as leaks forced Shell to shut a pipeline exporting about 180,000 barrels a day. Nigeria, which has been exempted from Opec-led production curbs, also agreed to cap or cut output when it stabilised at 1.8-million barrels a day. But analysts said the current oil price rally could encourage more production, particularly from the US. "Relieved bulls should be careful what they wish for. Any price rebound will only embolden US shale producers at a time when rumours have started to emerge that the US shale boom is slowing," PVM oil analyst Stephen Brennock said in a note. Anadarko Petroleum said on Monday it would cut its 2017 capital budget by $300m because of depressed oil prices, the first major US oil producer to do so, after posting a larger than expected quarterly loss. Reuters