ANC MP Makhosi Khoza said on Tuesday that while she remained in support of having a vote of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma under secret ballot, such a ballot should only be under exceptional circumstances. Khoza was speaking at a packed auditorium in a debate on whether the vote should be under secret ballot. She was debating alongside UDM MP Bantubonke Holomisa and political analyst Steven Friedman. While Holomisa, whose party went to the Constitutional Court to clarify National Assembly Speaker Baleka Mbete’s power to decide for or against a secret ballot, Friedman said a secret ballot would preclude a slippery slope for Parliament’s role in democracy. Khoza said while there was merit on both sides of the argument, whether MPs voted for or against Zuma, it would be a telling time on whether the ANC would opt to listen to the public or themselves. "Whatever the speaker decides is her choice and discretion. But I believe that the threat is very real. ANC MPs who vote in an open ballot will be voting under a directive. As public representatives what we do should be known. But that pre-supposes that we are operating in an environment that ensures our safety," she said. Khoza said she had opened two criminal cases over threats and intimidation and no progress had been made on either of them to this day. She said a secret ballot would be a provision being sought under exceptional circumstances. "A secret ballot should really be treated as an exceptional circumstance. In the long term it is critical that as a matter of course the public should know how members of its Parliament have voted on various issues. But I would plead with the speaker to consider the exceptional circumstances in this specific case," she said. Khoza has received death threats and threats of arson since being vocal about the vote of no confidence. She was also critical of Minister of Police Fikile Mbalula, who labeled ANC MPs calling for a secret ballot as "suicide bombers" and implied that their jobs as MPs were on the line if they did not tow the party line. Holomisa said Friedman did not understand the dynamics of what was happening in ANC politics internally. "ANC has been given instructions from their head office to defend this individual. They say they will deal with those who differ. There are many ways to deal with them. People are getting killed right now. The ANC MPs that are in Parliament are currently not being held accountable to the public but to Luthuli House," said Holomisa. Holomisa said various ANC MPs were progressively getting convinced to vote with their conscience at the vote of no confidence. "If ANC MPs vote with us, that would be a bonus. Some ANC MPs don’t see the need for secret ballot but the more we educate them the more they realise that they must choose between protecting Zuma and standing with the people of SA. "The so-called democracy has been hijacked by two families. If the vote is unsuccessful under secret ballot Zuma will carry on until 2019, I guess. But it will be a good omen, perhaps not for the country, but for the opposition," he said. However Friedman maintained that secrecy of MPs would undermine democracy in the long term. He said the ultimate solution was for police to protect MPs who complained of harassment and threats. "If we discover that a judge was being threatened with violence if they didn’t come to a specific judgement we would not ask them to judge in secret but get the police to do their job and protect them. Khoza should be protected. Making her a secret MP is not the solution," said Friedman. He said it did not seem to him that a secret ballot would protect MPs from any harassment or danger by holding a secret ballot. He also said a secret ballot might not be likely to oyster Zuma. "Many people here are living in far worse circumstances than MPs so the argument of concern for their livelihoods does not wash. If it is a secret ballot the result could very well be the same in any event, unless is it a secret ballot different from secret ballots Parliament usually holds," he said. The Constitution left the question of secret ballot open to interpretation of law. What kind of conscience is it that can only be expressed in secret. Your conscience should be expressed in public, Friedman concluded.