Software is launching an internal investigation after a media report alleged the company had paid kickbacks as part of SA’s wide-ranging state capture scandal in which fellow German software maker SAP has also been caught up. “Software AG is not aware of any noncompliant business practices in its South African operations,” a spokesman said. But “based on current media speculations, the company has started an internal review”. The spokesman said Software could not comment further until the review had been completed. The report, published jointly on Tuesday by the Amabhungane and the Daily Maverick’s Scorpio investigative reporting teams, alleged Software had entered into an apparent kickback deal with the Gupta family to win contracts. It said Software agreed to pay an intermediary firm linked to the Guptas, who are allies of President Jacob Zuma, to win deals with state-controlled agencies or private firms. Zuma and the Guptas have denied wrongdoing. Earlier this month, SAP named a new executive team in SA after it put four senior managers on leave pending its investigations into allegations it was involved in paying kickbacks. Among other allegations, the probe will look into whether Gupta-linked company CAD House received multimillion-rand kickbacks for helping SAP secure contracts with Transnet. CAD House is owned by Zuma’s son Duduzane and businesses within the Guptas’ Sahara Group. Dozens of leaked Gupta e-mails show not only how kickbacks were allegedly paid‚ but also how the Guptas gained access to confidential draft contracts between SAP and Eskom. The SAP-Eskom contract‚ valued at R130m‚ was for an SAP management tool that tracks purchasing‚ invoicing and payment documents Leaked e-mails and former public protector Thuli Madonsela’s State of Capture report have spawned a score of legal challenges by opposition parties and civil society calling for the prosecution of officials. On Tuesday, MPs held a preliminary meeting on graft allegations involving billion-rand coal contracts at Eskom. Parliament’s public enterprises committee is investigating allegations that former CE Brian Molefe and chief financial officer Anoj Singh were influenced by the Gupta brothers to award them coal contracts. Molefe and Singh have denied any wrongdoing. Reuters with Graeme Hosken