Bengaluru — Gold prices held steady on Wednesday, not far from the more than two-week highs hit in the previous session, as the dollar crept up from multi-month lows even as the fading prospect of a US monetary tightening continued to pressure the greenback. The dollar stayed on the defensive and remained close to more than 10-month lows as investors wagered any further tightening in the US would be slow at best, while optimism on China’s economy underpinned Asian shares and commodities. "We still remain somewhat neutral on gold this year despite a rather good run of late," said Edward Meir, analyst at INTL FCStone. "Still, we are not overly bearish on the precious metal at the stage either, as the backdrop of a falling dollar is too difficult to ignore." Also weighing on the dollar was the collapse of Republican efforts to overhaul or repeal Obamacare in the US Senate on Tuesday, dealing a sharp setback to Trump and the Republican Party’s seven-year quest to kill former President Barack Obama’s signature healthcare law. "The recent strength [in gold prices] is due to currency dynamics more than anything else," said Mark Keenan, commodity strategist at Société Générale. "We continue to forecast lower prices moving forward," Keenan said. Spot gold was nearly flat at $1,241.46/oz at 4.08am GMT. In the previous session, it hit its highest since June 30 at $1,244.56. US gold futures for August delivery fell 0.1% to $1,240.90/oz. Spot gold may rise more to $1,250/oz, as it had cleared a resistance at $1,239, said Reuters technical analyst Wang Tao. "We think the market may have done too much, too quickly for the time being and may be in store for a breather," Meir said. Meanwhile, holdings at the SPDR Gold Trust, the world’s largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund (ETF), fell 0.68% to 821.45 tonnes on Tuesday from 827.07 tonnes on Monday. In other precious metals, silver rose 0.1% to $16.26/oz, after touching its highest in about two weeks in the previous session. Platinum fell 0.2%, to $920.50/oz. On Monday, it had touched its highest since mid June. Palladium fell 0.3% to $861.25/oz. Reuters