Reinet, the R88bn investment company headed by tycoon Johann Rupert, is not spooked by prevailing jittery market sentiment and will continue to make selected investments in the financial year ahead. Writing in the annual report, Rupert noted that there had been considerable upheaval in the global political environment in the past 12 months, introducing further elements of uncertainty. But he said the overall economic situation in the US, Europe and Asia seemed to be improving. "Together with our partners, we see opportunities in the markets that we invest in and Reinet will continue to invest for the long term, maintaining a prudent approach." The company’s recent investment forays have included increasing its exposure to UK-based financial services specialist Pension Insurance Corporation (PensCorp) as well as smaller tilts at SPDR Gold shares and Selecta Biosciences. Reinet’s biggest investment is a holding of 68-million shares in British American Tobacco (BAT), which accounted for about 71% of the portfolio at the end of March 2017. In 2016, BAT shares accounted for 67% of the portfolio value, but an increase in the cigarette maker’s share price resulted in its value rising. PensCorp, which provides risk management solutions to defined benefit pension funds, is Reinet’s second-biggest portfolio position. The annual report disclosed that at the end of 2016 PensCorp had £22.6bn in assets and had insured more than 134,000 pension fund members. Over the past financial year the company wrote new pension insurance business with premiums amounting to £2.6bn. The PensCorp stake is valued at almost €1.2bn by Reinet and represented almost 20% of the portfolio at end-March. While there is a lingering contention that Reinet is merely a proxy for BAT, Rupert said that since its formation in 2008 the company had invested more than €2bn. At the March 31 year-end Reinet had committed to provide further funding of €288m to its investments. While Reinet’s portfolio has been greatly diversified by private equity and other smaller direct investments, at the end of March the combined holdings in BAT and PensCorp represented about 90% of the net asset value. This is compared with 85% in the previous financial year. Rupert said Reinet’s stake in BAT was closely monitored. "Although we have sold some shares in recent years to diversify Reinet’s portfolio, the decision to maintain the position during the year under review has proved to be the correct one," he said. BAT’s share price on the London Stock Exchange rose from £40.90 to £53 between April 2017 and end-March 2017. Reinet’s third-biggest investment, Trilantic Capital Partners (the old Lehman Brothers private banking business), appeared cautious on its outlook for its local economy. The annual report quoted Trilantic executive Charlie Ayres as saying the company remained cautiously optimistic about the outlook of US domestic companies in general. Trilantic primarily targets investments in the consumer, energy, industrials, technology, media and telecommunications, financial and business services sectors. There are six private equity funds with aggregate capital commitments of $7.7bn.