Infighting among political leaders instead of promoting business-friendly policies risks keeping SA mired in recession, according to Investec CEO Stephen Koseff. The ANC is being divided by corruption scandals surrounding President Jacob Zuma, his ties to the Gupta family and a contest for who will replace him as head of the party at the end of 2017. Government policies are also raising concern with Mineral Resources Minister Mosebenzi Zwane releasing the new Mining Charter in June, which is being challenged in court by the industry, and this week freezing the granting and renewing of mining rights. "There’s so much political noise out there, no one is concentrating properly on the economy and what needs to be done to get it growing," Koseff said in an interview in Johannesburg on Friday. The proposed mining charter "is something just at absolute loggerheads with a growing economy. You can’t say to the industry, ‘do XYZ’ and then expect them to still invest". Investec — which owns a bank and money managers with almost $200bn in combined assets and operations in SA, the UK and Australia — is focusing on making sure it has the right clients, and is remaining cautious on lending to cope with the slowdown, the CEO said. It will focus on growing existing businesses, while rolling out insurance to customers in SA and a new online product called Click & Invest to individuals in Britain who have more than £10,000 to invest, he said. Room to cut The South African Reserve Bank lowered interest rates for the first time in five years on Thursday, in an effort to stimulate the economy, which it forecasts will expand only 0.5% in 2017. There is room for at least one or two more rate cuts because the rand has strengthened almost 10% against the dollar over the past year and inflation is within the central bank’s 3%-6% target range, Koseff said. A 14-point plan released earlier in July by Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba to revive economic growth by selling some assets and punishing state-owned companies for not sticking to conditions of financial support, "was more of the same", Koseff said. "We need to do better than that." Taking advantage of export zones where employers could attract contracts by not being subject to minimum wage rules, or by promoting industries in tourism, computer coding and service jobs, would instill investor confidence, increase consumer spending and boost the economy, he said. Otherwise, it could mean the country would eventually have to rely on a bailout by the International Monetary Fund. "You might as well do the right thing before you get to that point," said Koseff. "It’s actually not that hard to shift direction. You just have to understand that you have to be a lot more business-friendly." Bloomberg