The rand was weaker against hard currencies shortly before midday on Tuesday, as the local unit was once again put on the back foot after comments by ANC officials. The party said control of the budget should be moved to the Presidency from the Treasury, which brought rand gains to a halt, Nedbank Corporate and Investment Analysts said. ANC officials had, however, clarified that the Treasury was meant to be tractable when it came to state priorities. The Treasury should remain a core institution for budgeting but should be better placed along with other ministries, to align its role with developmental objectives‚ officials said. The ANC had proposed in policy documents ahead of the conference that the Presidency improve its status as the strategic centre of governance. This would mean serving as the central driver for resource planning and co-ordination of state policy On Monday, Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane also backed off from her proposal have the constitutional mandate of the Reserve Bank changed. Mkhwebane stuck to her reasons for proposing that the mandate of the Bank change, but indicated in a statement she would not oppose a legal review of her findings, on the advice of senior counsel. International factors have also weighed on emerging markets and the local currency, as investors price in the likelihood of monetary policy tightening by several central banks. While a combination of international and local factors were weighing on the rand, it seemed domestic issues had affected the currency more markedly in the last few weeks, TreasuryOne analysts said. Investors are eyeing Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen’s appearance before the US Congress on Wednesday and Thursday, where she is expected to give more clues on the pace of interest-rate increases for this year. There was some scepticism over whether the US Fed’s planned interest-rate increase cycle would meet the required pace of improvement in economic metrics, analysts said. The Bank of Canada was also expected to announce on a rate decision, which could offer a further sign to the market of if or when synchronised monetary policy could begin. At 11.30am‚ the rand was at R13.5798 to the dollar from Monday’s R13.486‚ at R15.4717 to the euro from R15.3712 and at R17.5237 to the pound from R17.3678. The euro was at $1.1393 from $1.1399.