Tokyo — The euro held near two-year highs against the dollar on Friday after the head of the European Central Bank (ECB) said tapering of its stimulus will be on the table this northern autumn, while a solid global economic outlook kept Asian share prices near decade highs. While ECB president Mario Draghi set no date for changes to the bond-buying plan, investors took his comments on Thursday as confirming the expectation that the discussions would lead to monetary tightening in 2018. "Although bond markets didn’t take his comments as something particularly new, the currency market liked the fact that Draghi confirmed his stance towards tapering," said Daisuke Uno, chief strategist at Sumitomo Mitsui Bank. In early Asian trade, the euro stood at $1.1630, maintaining its 1% gain on Thursday, its biggest since June 27, when Draghi first sparked the expectation that the ECB will dial back its bond-buying scheme. Signs of steady global growth, which have prompted the ECB and a couple of other major central banks to signal future tightening since June, have kept the world’s shares on firm footing. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan, which has gained about 5% in the past two weeks, eased 0.2% on Friday. Japan’s Nikkei dropped 0.3% as the yen rose against the dollar. MSCI’s gauge of stocks across the globe was little changed after rising for a 10th consecutive session on Thursday, its longest such streak since February 2015. It has advanced 3.1% in the latest rally. "Strong global growth and decent earnings outlook are supporting shares globally," said Tatsushi Maeno, senior strategist at Okasan Asset Management. US quarterly earnings are expected to have climbed 8.6%, above the 8% rise projected at the start of July, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S. About 15% of S&P 500 companies have posted results so far. Still, the major US indices were almost flat on Thursday, not helped by concerns about US President Donald Trump’s inability to push his through healthcare reform bills, the passage of which will be needed to finance his tax cut plans. The dollar was also dogged by similar concerns, with its index against a basket of major six currencies hitting its lowest level since August on Thursday. Against the yen, the US currency hit a three-week low of ¥111.48 on Thursday even after the Bank of Japan (BoJ) governor Haruhiko Kuroda dropped no hint of following other central banks in curtailing many years of stimulus. It last stood at ¥111.87. While the euro gained sharply on Draghi’s comments, global bond markets reacted more calmly, partly as he did not give a clear signal on when the ECB will announce its tapering. The 10-year US treasuries yield dropped to 2.238%, its lowest in three weeks, on Thursday and last stood at 2.261%. The 10-year German bund yield also ended down at 0.531%, from close of 0.543% the day before. "I think it is unlikely that Draghi will announce tapering in September. Before the ECB reduced its bond purchase in April, Draghi had asked his staff to look into options in September, and three months later in December he made an announcement," said Hideki Kishida, a senior economist at Nomura Securities. "This time he hasn’t even tasked his staff to prepare options," he added. In commodities, oil prices were little changed after choppy trading the previous day, as the nagging concern about abundant global crude supply sank prices after an early rally had boosted Brent above $50 a barrel for the first time since June 7. Traders predicted prices would hold near current levels ahead of Monday’s meeting between key Opec and non-Opec producers in St Petersburg, Russia. Brent crude futures traded at $49.26 a barrel, down 0.1% on day. Reuters