Think of the Land Rover Discovery and one can easily conjure up images of the first series model ploughing through muddy terrain during the Camel Trophy days, proving its mettle as a tough-as-nails, all conquering SUV that can reach any corner of Africa with relative ease. It is this very nature of the model that many an ardent fan would regale you with and the reason many owners would upgrade to the latest model without as much as flinching. My personal encounter of the Discovery was the third generation when I started off in the industry just over a decade ago. It was a British Racing green diesel variant that I tested, which although it had a decent cabin, was definitely geared more towards utilitarian purpose. Meanwhile, the turbodiesel engine employed at the time was marred by huge bouts of turbo lag that were further exacerbated by its portly weight, which meant that progress was lacklustre and fuel consumption not particularly class leading. I then reviewed a V6 S petrol variant and its fuel consumption was the type that would make your eyes water. Then the Discovery 4 came about and while the vehicle was essentially based on its predecessor, the exterior was classier, while the cabin felt a tad more premium. However, it was the engines that brought the most marked improvements with the SDV6 variants being the pick of the range in my book. If there was a Disco (as it is affectionately dubbed) to buy, the series four would be it Now the manufacturer has finally made the series five available to South African consumers and following numerous reports in Motor News of the model’s development, we have finally driven the production model. The launch, which took place in Waterberg, Limpopo gave us sufficient time to sample the model on both tarmac and, of course, off the beaten track. Overall, the styling does somehow polarise opinion and there is a great deal to pore over then digest. The new design language is definitely more prudent here than in any of the marque’s recent models and the Range Rover Velar will perhaps see the greatest design departure thus far. In the instance of the Disco, though, the design looks less boxy and perhaps something that some fans will be averse to, while the offset rear number plate looks out of place in the overall design theme. That aside, the Discovery is impressive. Starting from the body shell that has shed 480kg over its predecessor, the vehicle feels decidedly light from the helm. The cabin, too, has adopted much of the Range Rover’s items in specific areas, but stops short of going too plush. We took the vehicle through a mild off-road course that included some water wading, which the vehicle managed with relative ease. Thanks to the 238mm ground clearance and up to 900mm of water wading depth, the new Discovery continues the model’s off-road capability as we came to experience during the launch drive. There are two engine variants available, which are essentially carried over from the previous model — the 3.0l biturbo diesel with 190kW and 600Nm and the 3.0l V6 supercharged petrol making 250kW and 450Nm. Both are allied to an eight-speed automatic gearbox and have the requisite second generation Terrain Response, which now also has a trailer guidance system that makes hitching a trailer to the electronic tow bar an absolute cinch. While the model is narrower and shorter overall than the outgoing model, the wheelbase has swelled by 38mm to provide better legroom for all occupants. You can also opt for the electrically operated rear seats that can easily be operated either from the boot-located buttons or via the infotainment screen or even a smartphone. There is up to 2,500l of boot space with all rear seats folded forward, while there is only 258l behind the rear (third row) seats. It will set you back just over R30,000 for the electrically operated rearmost seats, which are well worth it in my view. Of the two engine derivatives, it was the diesel that was the pick of the range. Thanks to its effortless disposition, which can be credited to its 600Nm, it also makes light work of overtaking. All but the entry level model come with air springs, which offers a cushy ride over broken surfaces and is arguably one of the model’s most standout features. Pricing starts at R980,000 for the 3.0 V6 S rising up to R1,457,500 for the 3.0 V6 Supercharged First Edition. In all fairness the new Discovery has retained all the off-road hallmarks of its predecessors, but has now also massaged in a fair amount of refinement to make it an even more accomplished, dual purpose package.