London — Oil rose above $48 a barrel on Wednesday in response to a fall in US fuel inventories and a cut in the US government’s forecast for crude output in 2018, which raised hopes that a supply glut was easing. US crude inventories fell by 8.1-million barrels, industry group the American Petroleum Institute said on Tuesday, much more than the forecast. Official inventory data from the Energy Information Administration (EIA) is due at 2,30pm GMT. Brent crude, the global benchmark, was up 86c, at $48.38 a barrel by 8.24am GMT. US crude gained 93c to $45.97. "While further upside could be expected in the short term amid the speculations of a cut in US production, gains may be limited by the firm oversupply dynamics of the markets," FXTM analyst Lukman Otunuga said. The US crude stocks drop will raise hopes that a long-awaited market rebalancing is under way. A supply glut has stuck around for three years, despite an Opec-led output cut in 2017, keeping oil at less than half its price of mid-2014. Also supporting prices, the EIA said on Tuesday it expected US crude oil production to rise by less than previously forecast next year due to a lower price outlook. The lower 2018 forecast of 9.9-million barrels per day will ease concerns that the Opec-led supply cut will lead to a flood of competing US shale supplies, swamping the Opec effort. Still, output of 9.9 million bpd would be a record for US production. The supply cut led by oil cartel Opec has lent prices some support, but in recent weeks rising output from Libya and Nigeria — Opec members exempt from the deal — has pushed supply higher. Figures that Opec uses to monitor its supply show that Opec production has risen in June by more than 300,000 barrels per day, as more oil from the exempt countries countered high compliance by many others. Top exporter Saudi Arabia plans to export less. A Saudi industry source said on Wednesday that Riyadh planned to cut shipments in August by more than 600,000 barrels per day, taking exports for that month to their lowest level in 2017, to balance a seasonal rise in domestic use. The latest Opec monthly report, containing June production figures, was scheduled to be published later on Wednesday. Reuters