Disruption of the health sector looms this week as the National Education, Health and Allied Workers Union (Nehawu) plans to take its members at the National Health Laboratories Service (NHLS) on an indefinite strike over wages from Wednesday. Management will be working with provincial health departments to minimise the effect of the strike on health laboratories. The NHLS employs about 7,000 people and is responsible for more than 80% of the country’s pathology diagnostic services, which could be thrown into disarray as a result of the strike. The union and management deadlocked last week over a wage increase, with NHLS offering a 3% pay rise and Nehawu demanding a 7.3% hike. A strike by the 143,000 members of the National Union of Metalworkers of SA (Numsa) in the engineering sector could also be on the cards and will be weighed up by the union’s central committee which meets for the duration of the week to discuss this and other issues. The union is busy consulting workers as to whether they want to go on strike over wages. There have been four failed wage negotiations, with employers offering between 5% and 6% and Numsa demanding a 15% wage increase across the board. The union already has a certificate from the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration to go on strike. Should a strike take place it will hit foundries and the electronics and telecommunications, plastic and fabrication industries. Machinery and equipment, the automotive components sector, electrical engineering, basic metals, heavy and light engineering, gate and fence and construction engineering companies would also be hit. The strike would also delay work at the Medupi and Kusile power stations. The ANC will be continuing its attempts to unify the warring factions in the Western Cape. The party’s national working committee returns to the province on Sunday and Monday (July 23-24) in a further bid to resolve the infighting. This follows last Monday’s talks between the national leaders, including President Jacob Zuma and ANC secretary-general Gwede Mantashe, and the provincial executive committee. The decision by the provincial executive committee to disband its biggest region, Dullah Omar, which includes the Cape Town metro, has fuelled tensions. The region is understood to be backing Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma for the presidency. The factional battles are seen as being a proxy fight in the race for the ANC presidency between Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa and Dlamini-Zuma. ANC spokesman Zizi Kodwa said the purpose of the talks was to prepare for the 2019 general election. "We are preparing for an overwhelming victory for the ANC and we need to get our structures ready and to unite them to fight a successful campaign," he said. Meanwhile the DA is also laying the groundwork for the 2019 election. Party leader Mmusi Maimane will continue his #Change19 Tour, which is the party’s precursor to the 2019 election campaign. Maimane is touring the country in order to undertake door-to-door campaigning and to hold meetings with community members and stakeholders, as well as the youth. On Wednesday he will be in Drakenstein in the Western Cape. "The focus of the tour is for the leader to have face-to-face engagements with as many communities as possible – particularly in areas where the DA is expanding its presence and reach," Maimane’s spokesman, Graham Charters, said. Trade and Industry Minister Rob Davies will lead an outward trade and investment mission to Lusaka, Zambia on Monday and Tuesday accompanied by, among others, 20 companies funded by the Department of Trade and Industry. Zambia is one of SA’s top-five trade partners in the Southern African Development Community region with total bilateral trade amounting to R33bn in 2016. The mission will help to consolidate political ties in addition to strengthening economic relations. The Department of Labour will take its national campaign to strengthen the implementation of employment equity to the Free State. It will host a workshop in Bloemfontein on Monday to create awareness about compliance with the Employment Equity Act. To date, workshops have been held in Kimberley, Rustenburg, Nelspruit, Thohoyandou and Polokwane. Communications Minister Ayanda Dlodlo will deliver the keynote address at the national communicators forum in Durban on Tuesday and Wednesday. It brings together the heads of communication in local and provincial government.