Singapore — Asian shares scaled a near-decade peak on Thursday, bolstered by a surge in global stocks to new records on strong US corporate earnings, while the yen eased slightly after the Bank of Japan (BoJ) reinforced the expectation it will lag behind other central banks in dialling back stimulus. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan added 0.15%, hovering near its highest level since December 2007. Australian stocks rose 0.6% and South Korea’s Kospi was up 0.1%. Chinese blue-chips advanced 0.15%, while the Shanghai Composite edged up 0.25%. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng crept up 0.3%. The MSCI World index inched up in its 10th consecutive session of gains on Thursday and set a record high for the sixth consecutive day, lifted by record closing highs on Wall Street in the wake of strong earnings reports. "In the US, the earnings season seems to be surprising a little bit on the upside," said Bruce McCain, chief investment strategist at Key Private Bank in Cleveland. "What we have seen recently in the economic reports suggests it should be even better overseas.… So we have come to the point where things look pretty good in the US and it looks even better in prospect overseas, so what’s not to like about equities," he said. The yen weakened slightly after the BoJ pushed back its projected timing for hitting its 2% inflation target, as it cut price forecasts until fiscal year 2020. The Japanese currency slipped 0.2% to trade at ¥112.10 to the dollar following the BoJ decision. The weaker yen helped lift the Nikkei 0.4%. The euro was steady at $1.15195 on Thursday, ahead of a meeting of the European Central Bank (ECB) later in the session. The common currency hit 14-month high this week following seemingly hawkish comments by ECB president Mario Draghi. At Thursday’s meeting, the ECB may drop a reference to its readiness to increase the size or duration of its asset-purchase programme before announcing in the autumn how and when it will start winding down its bond buying. "The euro has surged enormously on the back of hopes that the ECB is going to start the process of shutting the door on loose monetary policy," Naeem Aslam, chief market analyst at ThinkMarkets UK, wrote in a note. "The ECB needs to be clear about its forward guidance and it should reinforce that in a subtle manner. Coming out of the gates too aggressively would create shock waves in the market." The dollar index, which tracks the greenback against a basket of trade-weighted peers, was flat at 94.784. The Australian dollar set a new two-year high on Thursday, still heady from the minutes of the last Reserve Bank of Australia meeting, released on Tuesday, which showed the central bank had turned more upbeat on the economic outlook. It pulled back from that high to trade down 0.15% from Wednesday’s close at $0.7942. The Canadian dollar was about 0.1% weaker at C$1.2615 to the dollar. On Tuesday, it touched a 14-month high on record domestic factory sales and stronger oil prices. Oil prices, which hit a two-week peak on Wednesday on a bigger than expected weekly draw in crude and petrol inventories in the US, were marginally lower on Thursday. US crude fell 0.1% to $47.07 a barrel, after jumping 1.6% overnight. Global benchmark Brent also lost 0.1% to $49.64, holding on to most of Wednesday’s 1.8% gain. Gold pulled back 0.15% to $1,238.55/oz on Thursday. Reuters