When you launch a new model and in its first year it increases your sales by half, you crack open the bubbly. If you are in England, you go to the pub. Once the hangover has subsided you gather everyone together and ask them if they can do it again. It appears that they can, because here is the new Jaguar E-Pace, which will go on sale in SA early in 2018. After selling more than 50,000 examples of the F-Pace around the world in 2016, the company then announced it will make an all-electric I-Pace SUV available in 2018. Okay we all said, a battery-electric small SUV — nice move Jag. While it was busy unveiling it, the rumours had already started that there would be a regular model to sit below the World Car of the Year title-winning F-Pace. It is Jag’s attempt to take on the Audi Q5, BMW X3, Porsche Macan and Range Rover Evoque, the latter of course being in the same Jaguar Land Rover stable. Unlike the Evoque, Jag says the E-Pace is a "compact performance SUV with sports car looks". That might sound familiar: Porsche describes its Macan as "the sports car of SUVs". The design is already a giveaway that there is sports car DNA in there. The company says that the design has been inspired by the F-Type and that is most evident in the lights mounted high on the front. It also features sports car-like short front and rear overhangs, with the wheels pushed right out to the corners. Recognisable "Established Jaguar design principles ensure the E-Pace is immediately recognisable as the sports car of its class," Jaguar design director Ian Callum says. "Our new compact SUV combines the interior space, connectivity and security that families expect with proportions, purity of design and performance not usually associated with such a practical vehicle." At 4,396mm long, it is shorter than the Macan, with a wheelbase that is also shorter than its Stuttgart rival by 126mm. Interestingly though, it will boast a 577l standard boot space, 77l more than the Porsche. The E-Pace will get a full suite of Jaguar Land Rover’s (JLR) Ingenium engines, although Jaguar SA has yet to confirm which models we will get here. All engines will be 2.0l with the three diesel choices of 110kW, 132kW or 177kW. Two turbocharged petrol engines will be available delivering 183kW or 221kW. All models will get a ZF nine-speed box. Jag hasn’t given full performance details yet but has said that the 221kW petrol will be able to hit 100km/h in 6.4 seconds. Underpinning the E-Pace will be a new Active Driveline all-wheel-drive system, which is designed to deliver a rear-wheel drive bias. There is also an integral link rear suspension that aims to deliver both comfort and good dynamics and it is all linked to a configurable dynamics system and an adaptive dynamics system, the latter setting up the suspension and chassis depending on the driving style. "With the E-Pace, our aim was to develop a Jaguar SUV that feels and responds with the character of any of our rear-wheel-drive vehicles," says Mike Cross, Jaguar’s chief vehicle engineer of vehicle integrity. "It was fundamental to us that E-Pace delivers exceptional drive dynamics, yet is refined and comfortable, and this was achieved with intelligent solutions, such as the compact integral link rear suspension and the semi-solid mounted front subframe. Here is an all-wheel-drive compact performance SUV that has the precision and body control to make the E-Pace as rewarding for the driver as it is comfortable for the passengers." The interior will feature a wraparound dashboard, following a similar theme to other Jaguar models, while the rest will be a combination of sportiness and luxury. The designers have used premium leather and colour inserts similar to those in the F-Type. An interesting design feature is that the rotary dials on the centre console are said to have been inspired by the dials on a classic Leica camera. Talking of interesting design features, during the development of the car, the project team nicknamed it the "cub". The nickname has been carried through because there is not only a Jaguar cub graphic in the windscreen but it is also the graphic used for the LED puddle lamps. Tech will include a 12.3-inch full-colour touchscreen infotainment system, as well as a new head-up display that provides 66% more information than the system available in other Jaguar models. Connectivity is a main feature with a 4G Wi-Fi hotspot that can connect up to eight devices. There will also be four 12V charging points and five USB connections. Another tech item that JLR is proud of is the Activity Key, which allows you to leave your E-Pace in a field with the key inside and lock the car using a wristband which stays securely on your wrist while you hit the nearest mountain bike trail. You don’t have to be a cyclist though;, the bracelet is also waterproof so you could use it when you do the Midmar Mile. We might just drop it in a glass of water and see what happens. Expect loads of safety features to carry the model through a five to seven-year life cycle, including lane-keeping assist, driver condition monitoring, pedestrian detection, autonomous emergency braking, forward traffic detection and a pedestrian airbag. Strangely, Jaguar has said little about autonomous driving systems in the E-Pace, at least for now. The model line-up will include the standard E-Pace and the E-Pace R-Dynamic, both of which can be specified with S, SE or HSE packages. Like the F-Pace, there will also be First Edition models, available for the first year in unique colours, interior trim and equipment. The company has not disclosed how many it expects to sell, but we will not be surprised to see it overtake the larger F-Pace in terms of volumes to become the company’s biggest seller. And Jag is not done there either, because our sources say the company is developing a larger Pace model, the J-Pace, which will take on rivals such as the Audi Q7. It appears the Jaguar is standing taller than ever as it begins to prey on the expanding SUV market.