According to the latest reports, the next-generation Porsche Cayenne will become available sometime in 2017 or early 2018 and it’s likely it will be officially presented at this year’s Frankfurt Motor Show in September. These latest spy shots reveal more of the new styling than all other photos before — including the LED strip connecting the two tail lights. We’ve seen this feature on prototypes of the next generation 911, but it looks like the Cayenne will actually be the first to come with it. It’s also known that the 2018 Cayenne will definitely get a new underpinning. This will be the Volkswagen Group’s MLB SUV platform or, more precisely, the shortened version. The platform already exists in the Audi Q7 and Bentley Bentayga, so we know some specific details. The architecture involves a combination of aluminium, carbon fibre and ultra high-strength steel, which will make the 2018 Cayenne lighter and more rigid and agile. Our new spy shots also confirm the car maker plans to incorporate a lot of details from the Porsche Panamera Sport Turismo and some cues from the smaller Macan crossover. This way, the future design will get an amazing clamshell hood, though without the concept’s C-shaped fender vent. The interior will receive a complete redesign, while there should be some infotainment and safety changes too. Porsche’s engine department will provide several interesting engines. There will be a 4.0l V8 and 3.6l V8, as well as a turbocharged 2.9l V6. There will also be a plug-in hybrid with a 3.0l engine as part of the powertrain and a diesel option too. At this stage there is no word on which engines will be chosen for the South African market. Jeep to blaze a trial? When Jeep showed its Wrangler-based Trailcat concept in 2016, it never looked likely to be more than a concept, but a disguised production version has been seen running around. Jeep will probably reveal the new Wrangler towards the end of 2017 or early in 2018, perhaps at the Detroit show in January. We already know the company is planning more derivatives than the outgoing model, including bringing back a bakkie version, but the Trailcat takes things to an extreme. It is doubtful that it would have the 527kW Hellcat engine, with our sources suggesting the 223kW Hurricane engine. If Jeep is serious about the model, then expect it in 2019. Cat gets more muscle Jaguar has announced some upgrades for its 2018 XJ executive sedan models. It has also announced the XJR575, which boasts 423kW and a bunch of performance and trim upgrades. All models in the range will also get new technology including the company’s Touch Pro infotainment system, a new 10-inch touchscreen and 4G Wi-Fi hotspot capability. New safety items include autonomous emergency braking, lane-keeping assist and driver condition monitoring. Cash for scrap Still with the parent company of Jeep, Fiat Chrysler SA has launched a scrappage scheme. Similar to schemes in Europe and elsewhere, it is designed to get older vehicles off the road and even allows you to trade-in your scrapped vehicle. Not surprisingly, it is also designed to get you to get rid of the old banger and buy a new Fiat. Fiat SA says that the campaign will focus on three types of transactions, consisting primarily of a scrapped vehicle deal whereby customers will be offered up to a maximum of R40,000 by a Fiat dealership on receipt of a scrapping certificate. This is to be used towards the purchase of a new or used Fiat vehicle. There are plenty of Ts and Cs to the deal, including customers having to produce a scrapping or deregistration certificate of vehicle, proof of ownership (Natis doc or alternative) as well as proof that vehicle was registered in the name of the owner within the past six months. Vehicles that are eligible for deregistration or scrapping include those that have been declared unfit for operation on public roads, have been stolen and not recovered, have been demolished or have become exempt from registration. Phantom to float it Today is a big day for Rolls-Royce. Tonight the company will reveal the next generation of its famous Phantom limousine. So far the firm has only released the teaser image you see here, but when all is revealed we will have the full story on the Business Day website, so if you are seeking the ultimate symbol of luxury then be sure to check it out.