The South African Communist Party (SACP) holds its 14th party congress this week, at which it will discuss whether to break away from the ANC-led tripartite alliance and contest elections on its own. The fractured state of the ANC and allegations of state capture have induced serious discussions in the left axis of the alliance about the possibility of the SACP contesting for state power on its own. This is not the first time the party has considered such a proposal. The discussion was first initiated in 2005, when it was confronted with what it termed the "1996 class project" under former president Thabo Mbeki, the aftermath of which was the communist party siding with Jacob Zuma. Second deputy general secretary Solly Mapaila on Sunday confirmed that this was still on the agenda for the congress and would be discussed in conjunction with the reconfiguration of the alliance. He said the reconfiguration of the alliance was an important aspect of the debate. Some provinces had already taken a firm decision that the SACP should go solo at the local government polls in 2016, while others were still taking final decisions, Mapaila said. This is likely to be a hot debate at the congress. In its document on state power and elections released in November 2016, the SACP concluded that the political situation in the country was fluid and much would depend on the outcome of the ANC’s 2017 national conference. Mapaila said the SACP would not be talking about ANC succession or pronouncing on who the party thought should be the next president of the governing party. This is despite its other alliance partner, Cosatu, coming out to endorse Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa. Mapaila said the SACP would never discuss ANC leadership and endorse specific candidates, but had an interest in who became leader as that person ultimately became the leader of the alliance. "We have always said we prefer the ANC to handle it. We can only come in if there are gross irregularities that are taking place, for instance the issue of state capture and we were able to come out clearly and even ask President Jacob Zuma to step down," he said. The SACP will also be electing its own leadership at the congress — where Blade Nzimande is expected to stay on as general secretary despite him saying in 2016 he would not. SACP delegates have been urged to come to consensus on leadership as it has done in the past two congresses. "The SACP doesn’t really fight on leadership, it’s not something we are used to. "Our call for unity is an important call and our members are the ones who have been showing these signs throughout. There is not much expectation of a huge contest on leadership," Mapaila said. He said that he would not be standing for Nzimande’s position, but if nominated to retain his current position he would accept.