The number of maize futures contracts traded on the JSE has fallen on expectations of a bumper maize crop. During the drought, the increased demand by traders for futures pushed futures prices higher as they tried to cover losses because of an uncertain yield outcome. "The main driver [futures contracts traded] was on the back of the anticipated bumper crop, but we are starting to see an uptick in open interest, which translates to market participants starting to build up their positions," said JSE head of commodities Raphael Karuaihe. The excess maize supply would not exert a negative influence on the market, but would ensure a sustainable derivatives market, Karuaihe said. At the end of June 2017, 522,234 white maize futures contracts were traded, 31.5% lower than those traded by June 2016. For yellow maize, volumes traded were at 302,777 contracts, down by 2.68%. Maize futures contract prices also peaked during the drought. A white maize September-future contract traded at R2,597 a tonne in January 2017, but was down to R1,929 a tonne at Wednesday’s close. A yellow maize September-future contract traded at R2,540 a tonne and was at R2,058 a tonne, over the same period. Favourable weather enabled farmers to raise maize production and recover from the severe drought caused by the 2015-16 El Niño effect. In its fifth production forecast, the Crop Estimates Committee said the revised forecast for commercial maize for June remained unchanged at 15,631-million tonnes, making it the largest locally produced crop on record. Karuaihe said that supply-and-demand dynamics in the commodities market played an essential role in price determination, which resulted in grain prices, particularly maize, also hitting record highs and would result in the surplus production exerting a downward pressure on grain prices. Independent analyst Andrew Fletcher said the way forward for maize prices largely depended on what happened in the US market. July was a critical pollination period for US grain and was the market driver, Fletcher said. "If their prices go up, ours will also go up a little bit, because we can’t really be cheaper relative to world markets." Weather during the pollination of maize is a critical factor in the developmental stage of the crop and can determine the yield. In its latest weather report, the US agriculture department said thunderstorms around the US’s summer-grains belt helped to ease short-term dryness and provided beneficial moisture for maize and soybean crops.