Kumba Iron Ore’s share price jumped 9% on Tuesday morning after it declared a R15.97 interim dividend, resuming returns to shareholders after a sharp increase in profits based on higher output and improved prices for its products. Kumba, SA’s largest iron ore producer and an Anglo American subsidiary, resumed its dividends after last paying them in 2015, said  CEO Themba Mkhwanazi. "We are pleased to be able to be pay a dividend because it shows a renewed confidence in our business and environment we are operating in. We are still conservative in our approach," he said during a media call. Kumba was confident that its empowerment credits of 29% black ownership stemming from existing and historical transactions were "defendable", he said when asked about potential risk to the company posed by the third iteration of the Mining Charter — which has yet to be implemented — that would increase ownership requirements to 30% from 26%. "We are also confident that our rights, despite whatever may be developing, are secure and because of that we are protected," Mkhwanazi said. "We’d like to see more certainty." Kumba’s net cash stood at R13.5bn at the end of June, reflecting the 23% increase in production to 21.9-million tonnes for the six-month period and a 22% increase in revenue to R21.5bn. Kumba recorded a profit of R6bn compared with R3.8bn a year ago. Sales volumes grew by 5% to 21.2-million tonnes, with export tonnages growing by more than a million tonnes to 19.5-million tonnes because of improved output. Increased sales in its export markets were important for Kumba because of the 29% increase in average prices it realised of $71 a tonne. "Iron ore prices are expected to remain under pressure in the short to medium term," the company warned. Kumba expects full-year production of up to 43-million tonnes, with about 29-million tonnes of that coming from its flagship Sishen mine. While ArcelorMittal SA is contractually able to buy 6.25-million tonnes of ore from Kumba, the miner expects the steel maker to buy only up to 3.5-million tonnes this year.