Just hours after confirming that a 32-year-old man was murdered in an apparent hit at Durban’s volatile Glebelands Hostel precinct on Wednesday night‚ police said a second person was killed in a night of bloodshed. A 50-year-old woman‚ who has not been named‚ was gunned down at her tuck shop‚ South African Police Service (SAPS) spokeswoman Col Thembeka Mbhele said on Thursday morning. Her murder‚ at about 8.30pm‚ came just 15 minutes after the first murder. Both murders took place despite Glebelands being under 24-hour police guard. “It is alleged that [on Wednesday] just after 8.30pm the deceased was at her house‚ where she also runs a tuck shop‚ in Glebelands Hostel, when she was approached by two unknown suspects pretending to be customers,” Mbhele said. “The suspects shot the deceased in the head and chest before fleeing the crime scene. The motive is unknown.” She said it was not known whether the two murders were related, “since police are at an early stage of investigation”. According to community activist Vanessa Burger‚ the murder was committed in front of the woman’s 14-year-old granddaughter. At 8.15pm on Wednesday night‚ gunshots echoed through the Glebelands precinct in Umlazi‚ south Durban. Despite 24-hour policing‚ a resident of the hostel’s P Block lay in a pool of blood. A short while later‚ he died in hospital. The latest two shootings follow dozens of killings at the hostel. "We can confirm the incident that took place last night at Umlazi’s Glebelands Hostel‚ about 8.15pm‚ where a 32-year-old man was shot by unknown suspects in the head‚" Mbhele said. "He was taken to hospital‚ where he succumbed to his injuries. The motive is unknown. A case of murder was opened at Umlazi police station for investigation." Burger — who last week testified about the volatile situation at the hostel at a sitting of the Moerane commission on political violence in KwaZulu-Natal — said the man‚ who has not been named‚ was on his way home when he was attacked. "Shortly after returning home at around 8pm‚ a Glebelands Block P man was ambushed and shot several times near a small shop he operates below the building. The victim‚ in a critical condition‚ was rushed to hospital by relatives. Sadly‚ the Block P man didn’t make it‚" she said. This was the second time the man had been attacked. "On November 19 2015 he was shot — together with his mechanic‚ while working on his vehicle — in almost exactly the same manner at precisely the same time‚" said Burger. According to Mbhele‚ police deployments to the hostel will continue around the clock. "Police deployments remain in place on a 24-hour basis at the hostel. We encourage residents living in the hostel to report criminal activities to police so that we can stem this unnecessary loss of lives‚" she said. The Moerane commission recently heard that 89 people had died in violence at Glebelands alone since 2014‚ but no one had yet been convicted.