The recession and low business confidence are dragging down operating conditions, which have slumped to their weakest level in 14 months, according to the Standard Bank purchasing managers index (PMI), released on Wednesday. The index dropped to 49 in June, from 50.2 in May. The survey gauges operating conditions and its latest reading signals a potential contraction in manufacturing in the coming months. Its latest reading also represents the sixth consecutive monthly decline in the index. Standard Bank strategist Shireen Darmalingam said the index was expected to remain low based on weak business confidence and the GDP contraction in the first quarter. Business confidence has declined to its lowest level since the 2009 recession. The Rand Merchant Bank and Bureau for Economic Research’s second-quarter business confidence index slumped 11 index points to 29 points, a reading well below the neutral 50-mark and an indication of poor confidence. “Depressed business confidence reflects expectations of suppressed future economic growth, which therefore indicates that the private business sector will not add jobs or increase investment at the present time,” said Investec economist Kamilla Kaplan. Commenting on what needed to be done to improve the economic outlook, Business Unity SA CEO Tanya Cohen said: “There are three points we need to be looking at now. “We need better education and skills, employment creation and a more inclusive economy and we need to look at how we develop ... enterprises.” BNP Paribas economist Jeff Schultz said: “The Standard Bank PMI indicates that there is weak economic growth and policy uncertainty.” But manufacturing would have to perform badly for there to be another contraction in economic growth. “We’re expecting economic growth to bounce back into positive territory, [it] is expected to be subdued,” said Schultz. On Monday, the Absa PMI contracted in June to 46.7, from 51.5 in May, indicating that it might be a tough second quarter for the manufacturing sector and the reading left the Manufacturing Circle concerned.