Experts believe unconventional payments made by Gupta-owned Sahara Computers into offshore accounts could point to alleged money laundering. Information on the payments is contained in leaked e-mails linked to the Guptas, their associates and companies. The data show that between February 2013 and September 2015, Sahara Computers, which at the time was the Gupta empire’s flagship company, made 113 overseas payments totalling almost R552m. Experts said characteristics that could raise suspicions over money laundering include that the payments were all rounded off and carried no detailed descriptions or invoice numbers. In normal business practices, bank statements are expected to show business expenses and income. Four of the payments were to the Bank of Baroda, while 109 payments were to the State Bank of India for transfer overseas. A cashflow analysis showed that the amounts and payments frequencies increased over the two fiscal years. Werksmans Attorneys director and tax lawyer Ryan Killoran said the number of loans and their value was unusual, indicating that perhaps they were not loans but invoiced expenses. "One has to ask, why so many loans, as most companies do not operate this way," Killoran said. The payments to the banks, which were both authorised dealers of the South African Reserve Bank, were unlikely to be loans, he said. This was because the Bank would generally not allow loans to be given to foreign nationals overseas, he said. Neither could the money have been interest payments because the figures were too round and infrequent. This meant the payments could either be invoices paid or they were making payments to themselves in another country. "Payments to emigrants need tax clearance and are usually one-off and not so frequent payments. Back in 2014 and 2015 they [the Guptas] were definitely not emigrants. "These payments look more like self related-party invoices, which people or groups of companies usually make into rounded amounts," he said. A payment of R2.6m was made via the Bank of Baroda in February 2013. The other three payments were made in January (R7m), September (R5m) and December 2015 (R5m). The biggest transaction via the State Bank of India in 2013 was for R4.5m. In 2014, the largest transaction was R20m and in 2015 it was R67m. The highest number of transactions were in 2015. According to sources with in-depth financial sector knowledge, Sahara Computers’ bank at the time should have "theoretically" flagged these transactions with the Financial Intelligence Centre. Killoran said the lack of descriptions on the transactions was concerning and could indicate possible tax avoidance. All Bank authorised dealers were required to know the details of transfers and the South African Revenue Service was entitled to obtain this information from the Bank. "The flagging to the Financial Intelligence Centre by SA’s banks over the loans transfers would have occurred if the descriptions were vague." Between December 2015 and April 2016, SA’s four major banks — Standard, FNB, Absa and Nedbank — closed the accounts of companies controlled by the Guptas. In court papers, filed in former finance minister Pravin Gordhan’s matter against Oakbay Investments, the banks revealed that they feared money laundering was taking place. Gordhan wanted the court to rule on whether he could have intervened between the banks and its clients. The court is yet to hand down judgment. The Financial Intelligence Centre had also flagged 72 transactions worth R6.8bn because "there had been no apparent business or lawful purpose" for them.