UK public relations firm Bell Pottinger’s apology for an offensive social media campaign in SA is "insufficient and totally unacceptable"‚ says the Save SA campaign. The DA wants Bell Pottinger to go beyond apologising and follow it up with action. Bell Pottinger confirmed yesterday that it had dismissed the lead partner involved, and had suspended another partner and two employees, over accusations that it supported and aided campaigns to stir up racial division in SA through its work for Gupta-owned Oakbay Capital. "There has been a social media campaign that highlights the issue of economic emancipation in a way that we‚ having now seen it‚ consider to be inappropriate and offensive‚" Bell Pottinger CEO James Henderson said on Thursday. "We wish to issue a full‚ unequivocal and absolute apology to anyone impacted‚" he said‚ adding that executives had been "misled" about the campaign. South Africans have widely condemned the apology‚ saying it was simply not good enough. "Bell Pottinger – acting in partnership with its client – sowed racial mistrust‚ hate and race-baiting‚ and divided society," Save SA said. "Through its work‚ this British company has further polarised South African society and left deep scars in our social fabric. "It cannot be left to hide behind spin and say it was ‘misled’. This attempted naivety is unacceptable from a company with a global history of disinformation and dirty tricks. "We therefore demand to know who it worked with in SA‚ what its brief was‚ and who provided that brief – and‚ most importantly‚ who it was ‘misled’ by." The DA said the apology was “nothing but a PR-stunt brought on by the public pressure applied by the DA and the South African public". “If this apology was to be taken seriously‚ the company would fully disclose all the dealings with the Gupta family and President Jacob Zuma‚” the party said on Thursday evening. “More pertinently‚ they would commit to using all profits obtained from Gupta business deals to investing in building schools or any developmental nongovernmental organisations in SA.” The DA said it would continue to pursue the complaint it has lodged against Bell Pottinger with the UK-based Public Relations and Communications Association (PRCA)‚ which has given the company five days to respond to the allegations. Twitter was buzzing with reaction to the statement, with #BellPottinger trending early on Friday. Redi Tlhabi tweeted: "We remember #BellPottinger stooges who called US stooges. Cyberbullies unleashing sexist FAKE images to spread lies. YOU are captured & vile" "This is spin. Who misled them? How much did they pay their bots? We demand disclosure‚" said Chris Vick. "#BellPottinger ‘apology’ won’t undo the damage done & the demonising of so many good South Africans. Tell all & pay back‚" said Max du Preez. Gugulethu Mhlungu summed up what many were saying on social media: "#BellPottinger is now claiming that their senior management was "misled" about work on the Oakbay account." Save SA said Bell Pottinger needed to explain: • Whether it channelled money to front organisations that themselves fuelled even further division‚ such as Black First Land First and the so-called Decolonisation Foundation‚ as alleged in a report released by the SACP. • What its relationship was with the Gupta "propaganda arms"‚ such as ANN7 and The New Age. • Whether it has done work for any other entities that form part of the Gupta web of influence‚ including captured South African government departments and state-owned entities. • Whether it continues to do work for South African clients. "It is public pressure on Bell Pottinger that got us this far‚ and resulted in two major victories: the termination of its contract with Oakbay‚ and its public apology. "But we must keep up the pressure‚ and demand full disclosure. Only then can we begin to unravel the mess that Bell Pottinger – and the Guptas – have caused‚ and address the damage they have left in their wake‚" Save SA said.