Anglo American Platinum posted a chunky interim loss, as rand prices for its metals languish at 2013 levels and the company investigates ways to boost productivity and cut costs to cope with a difficult market — in which two-thirds of SA’s platinum production is loss-making. Amplats, which is 80% owned by Anglo American, has just one loss-making asset, the Amandelbult mine, and CEO Chris Griffith said the company had a plan to bring costs at the mine down by 25% in the next few years. Amplats reported a post-tax loss of R1.3bn for the six months to end-June, compared with a R1.5bn profit for the same period a year earlier, with impairments of R2.2bn in the period weighing heavily on the group. The company withheld an interim dividend payment. "The focus remains on optimal stay-in-business capital allocation and the company would like to reintroduce a sustainable dividend once the balance sheet has strengthened," Amplats said in a statement. "In the current environment the focus will be on low-capital, fast-payback and value-accretive projects," it said. Revenue fell by 11% to R27.3bn because of lower sales of platinum group metals as a result of refining difficulties reducing the amount of metal to sell by 8%, as well as a "significantly stronger rand". A 14% strengthening of the rand against the dollar during the interim period meant that a 13% increase in the dollar price per ounce of metal in the basket of metals Amplats produced during the interim period was negated, and the rand price for that basket of metals fell to 2013 lows of R24,400/oz, a 3% fall from the same period a year earlier. Despite the setback, net debt dropped to R5.9bn from R7.3bn at the end of December because of the receipt of a prepayment of R2.3bn and reduced expenditure on working capital. Amplats will approach the Department of Mineral Resources directly to motivate for the transfer of mineral rights to the new owners of Union mine. An application for ministerial approval will be lodged in coming weeks and Amplats management would visit the department to talk about it, said Griffith. Mineral Resources Minister Mosebenzi Zwane issued a statement last week saying he was proposing a moratorium on approving all new mining rights, prospecting rights and transfers given the legal challenge brought by the Chamber of Mines to the newly released third iteration of the Mining Charter. A number of lawyers have said Zwane’s actions are outside the mandate granted to him under the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act and that he certainly could not restrict the transfer of mineral rights between parties.