London — Oil’s rise back above $50 a barrel helped prod stock markets higher on Wednesday, and company results and economic data continued to soothe concern that the world economy may be ripe for a another slowdown. European stock markets were mainly higher, led by energy and commodity-linked companies, after Brent crude topped the $50 mark for the first time since early June. A slightly less bullish performance in Asia pulled the MSCI world equity index, which tracks shares in 46 countries, off record highs overnight. But early in the European session, it was up 0.1% on the day. Strong results from energy firms Subsea 7 and Tullow Oil helped European shares while banks weighed on index-level gains as investors awaited a Fed policy decision and UK gross domestic product (GDP) figures. "The indications are more positive on the outlook for energy stocks. While there was a lot of kitchen sinking from firms in second-quarter numbers, they have reset the expectations over the valuations now, they have cleaned up balance sheets," said Angelo Meda, head of equities at Banor SIM in Milan. "Kitchen sinking" refers to a communications strategy of getting all of the bad news out at once. "The outlook is not so bad," Meda said. "We are still missing one component, which is the commentary from big oil firms Total, BP, Royal Dutch Shell." The pan-European STOXX 600 gained 0.3%, in line with eurozone stocks and blue chips, as oil and gas stocks gained 0.8%. Germany’s Ifo business survey on Tuesday showed confidence soaring to record highs in July amid what its economists described as a "euphoric" mood in German industry, while US consumer confidence levels jumped to nearly 16-year highs. The latter numbers helped the dollar recover some ground in US and Asian trading on Tuesday, with traders citing a trimming of positions ahead of the Fed meeting. The Fed announcement is due at 6pm GMT. The dollar, under pressure since March from a retreat in expectations for further rises in interest rates this year, gained just over 0.1% against both the euro and the euro-dominated basket of currencies most used to measure its broader strength. "Most people have an ultra benign view of what we will get out of the Fed today," said Koon Chow, a strategist at Swiss private bank UBP. "The focus is not so much on the next hike but the start of the roll-off [the reduction of the central bank’s balance sheet]. The Fed has already helped us a lot by indicating that when it happens it will be a very gradual process." Reuters