Deal-hungry lenders are taking riskier bets in a competitive market with few bankable corporate credit assets, say loan market participants. This is despite the fact that cheap funding from the quantitative easing programmes of central banks may soon dry up. "Lenders are walking to the edge of a cliff globally, though no deals have blown up at scale," Sean Tai, head of Debtdomain syndicated loans at Ipreo, said on Wednesday. He was among delegates at the Loan Market Association’s sub-Saharan Africa syndicated loans conference. Excess liquidity was driven by easy money flowing from the quantitative easing programmes of global central banks, he said. Emerging markets have been big beneficiaries of this liquidity, raising questions as to what disruption the expected unwinding of central bank bond-buying programmes might cause. Bloomberg reported on Wednesday that market participants were bracing themselves for a reversal of asset purchases by the US Federal Reserve, European Central Bank and Bank of Japan. Global central banks, which inflated their balance sheets to almost $14-trillion following the global financial crisis in an attempt to spur economic growth, were now reversing asset purchases as economies recovered, Bloomberg said. With so much liquidity and competition, structured deals had skyrocketed in Europe, with deals struck on borrower-friendly terms, said Tai. Illustrating the level of risk-taking prevalent globally, European-leveraged deals were no longer acceptable to some US investors, he said. South African banks had also engaged in aggressive pricing on deals as excess liquidity from banks and other institutions chased too few bankable transactions, a local banker said. A deteriorating credit environment coupled with an increased cost of funding for banks was a challenge for lenders. In addition, African banks were crowded out by foreign lenders on certain deals and forced further into risk. The deal flow in sub-Saharan Africa was down in the first half of 2017, with 25 deals at a total value of $12.6bn reported compared with 50 deals at a value of $21.4bn for the first half of 2016, said Keith Flemmer, syndicate principal at Absa Capital. A pricing normalisation would occur only when improved growth drove more investment and lifted deal flow, he said. Alternatively, it could be event-driven, such as through the default of a large company. Surprisingly, credit assets had not experienced a material pricing effect from the new Basel regulations, given the lack of deal flow and strong demand, said one commentator. Market participants say strong interest from Asian and Middle Eastern banks, which are beginning to play leading roles in sub-Saharan African transactions and are forming relationships with various companies on the continent, has also increased liquidity. In this environment, it was all the more important for banks to have more cohesive and flexible intercreditor arrangements in place should a company default, said Steve Chemaly, banking and finance lawyer at Norton Rose Fulbright. The law firm had observed an increase in companies needing to restructure debt as SA’s recession deepened. Given the prevalence of banks lending in syndicates, creditors needed to agree upfront on the remedial action should a distressed debt event arise.