Sweden’s Sarah Sjostrom was surprised to narrowly miss her own world record in becoming the first woman to win four gold medals in the women’s 100m butterfly on Monday at the World Championships. The 23-year-old clocked 55.53sec, a championships record, 0.05sec off her own world record set at the 2016 Rio Olympics. She is the first reigning Olympic champion to add the world title in the event. Australia’s Emma McKeon took silver at 0.65sec back with Kelsi Worrell of the US taking bronze at 0.84sec. Sjostrom broke the 100m freestyle record on Sunday, in the 4x100m relay, when she became the first woman to swim under 52sec. Her victory in Budapest mirrors her 2009 success as a 15-year-old when the world championships were held in Rome. She failed to defend the 100m fly title in 2011 in Shanghai, but took gold at both the 2013 championships in Barcelona and two years ago in Kazan. She admitted feeling jaded after her freestyle world record on Sunday, but had been eager to get back in the pool. "I’m very happy with this gold. I didn’t know what to expect today, as I was a bit tired after four races on the first day. "I was surprised to see I was so close to the world record. It felt like I was going a bit slower than I did yesterday [freestyle relay], so maybe butterfly is about being relaxed then you can go even faster," she said. Ben Proud won the men’s 50m butterfly gold. but only realised he had won when no one else celebrated. Proud, 22, clocked 22.75sec in the sprint event with Brazil’s Nicholas Santos second at 0.04sec back while Andrii Govorov of Ukraine took bronze at 0.09 in a tight finish. "At first I didn’t realise I had won," said Britain’s Proud, clearly shocked by his own victory. "I was waiting for someone else to celebrate, but when no one did, I looked on the scoreboard and saw my name on top." Proud was born in London and moved back to the UK from Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, as an 11-year-old to follow his dreams of becoming a pro swimmer. "It’s a weird feeling, this is something I’ve dreamt of since I started swimming," he said. "It’s the reason I moved to the UK. For it to happen is amazing, I was never going to give up on that dream, I was going to keep going into my mid-30s." Proud qualified as the fourth-fastest from the semifinals and the 2014 Commonwealth champion was an outsider for gold in Budapest. "After last night I might not have looked in pole position, but deep down I knew if I got the start right, I’m in with a shout for the gold medal," he said. Britain’s Adam Peaty missed out on his own world record when he defended his 100m breaststroke title. He clocked a championships record of 57.47sec with Kevin Cordes of the US second at 1.32 with Russia’s Kirill Prigoda third at 1.58. Peaty had targeted his own world record of 57.13, set when he won the Olympic title in Rio, but came up short in his bid. But he was delighted to defend the world title he first won in Kazan two years ago. "A lot of hard work goes into competing and the crowd were amazing," AFP