The Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority, which reports to the Department of Water and Sanitation, promoted three executives irregularly, an EY report has found. The agency has not taken any action against the three executives despite the report finding that the manner in which they were promoted breached the agency’s internal policies. The authority is entrusted with SA’s water security, making it one of the most important government agencies. It is overseeing the multibillion-rand Lesotho Highlands Water Project, which is crucial for the water supply security of Gauteng and other parts of  the country. The project is expected to cost R25bn and construction tenders worth R1m and R1bn are due to be advertised. EY delivered its report in May following two whistleblower reports alleging irregularities and breach of company policy in appointments, promotions and salary increases for key personnel at the agency. The report finds that Prof Ola Busari, the agency’s executive manager for knowledge management, was promoted and a position was created for him. This also entailed a bump in his pay and a change in his reporting lines. However, Busari is on a fixed-term contract and there were also no changes effected to realign the organisation’s structure after his promotion. Busari was appointed in 2009 on a five-year, fixed-term contract and reported to the chief operating officer. Former agency CEO James Ndlovu added the role of strategy officer to Busari’s title so that the professor could report directly to the CEO. The report concludes that Busari should not have been promoted because he is a fixed-term employee and no recruitment process was followed. Hanje Botha, the agency’s executive manager for human resources management and organisational development, was appointed irregularly, although the report notes that she is "suitably qualified" for the position. However, the agency did not follow recruitment processes in this appointment. Lindani Gumede, the executive manager for enterprise-wide support services, was also found to have been appointed irregularly. The EY investigation finds that Gumede did not meet the minimum qualification requirements for his post. The agency said its board had sought legal advice following the findings and decided there was no evidence that the appointed individuals participated in any wrongdoing," and, therefore, no action would be taken. "As the individual responsible for the appointments was no longer in the employ of [the agency], it was too late to institute disciplinary action against the person," it said. mahlakoanat@businesslive.co.za