The South African political project is in transition. The language and reality of state capture; Bell Pottinger’s sinister involvement in directing the political trajectory; the at times fascist and totalitarian language used by key political figures; and the contradictory and seemingly paranoid messages from party and state indicate that reality and truth are being subverted. Hannah Arendt observed several features of totalitarianism in her 1966 landmark study. Dogma by a party or movement is held to be the only truthful reality and any contradictory experience is viewed as heresy, with multiple layers shielding the movement’s centre from having a meaningful relationship with reality. SA’s political language has steadily moved towards a state of mind that can be described as psychotic. Psychosis is a rupture with that which is real. Reality is attacked and subverted. There is an internal and external reality. People cannot live purely in the realm of fantasy (internal) but have to have an understanding that an object world exists in time and space outside of them (external). People need an appropriate adaptation to their environment where they do not retreat from what is to how they wish it to be. Optimally, internal reality has acceptable and benign distortions so people can engage with external reality in a functional manner. However, under certain conditions reality is attacked by mechanisms within the mind as a way to avoid knowing something. If making emotional meaning by linking certain types of thinking is too painful, the mind will attack the links people attempt to make. The ability to make links lies in people’s ability to have a sense of a mind that exists outside of them. The mind outside helps make meaning, makes contact with reality and builds structure and complexity. The initial mother-child relationship is held up as the prototypical relationship: mothers must help children with the process of making meaning. Mothers are attuned and receptive to their infants’ initially chaotic minds but provide the function of digesting emotional "stuff" and directing it back to the children in a more understandable and nuanced form. If this does not happen, the mind remains fragile and linking becomes dangerous because there is no capacity to navigate a complex internal psychology. Such people cannot adequately observe themselves or have a relatively accurate awareness of what is happening inside and outside of them. In this altered state of reality that is psychosis, malice is often found. The psychotic person wants to destroy hated feelings (of vulnerability or limitation maybe) — symbols and relationships that may require a complex mind that can either integrate emotional senses or bear the discomfort of confusion when struggling to integrate. Nothing makes sense, everything is dangerous, aggression is all around and consensual meaning between people and individuals no longer exists. Attack becomes a primary way to defend. We can, perhaps, tap into a cultural or group interiority — a platform, not of the individual, but of a way of engagement that the group draws on to articulate cultural ideas of politics or country; an interiority of the abstract that binds people. The conversation between individual-level and social-level theories is an academically complex one and is unresolved. Elizabeth Young-Bruehl is a scholar of the interplay between these two theory levels. She identifies a number of character types that populate this individual-social world. One of these types is obsessional prejudice — people who enjoy fixed ideas and ritualistic acts. They are cut off from their feelings. Also, "the obsessionally prejudiced attribute to their victims a special capacity for commercial or economic conspiracy and diabolical behind-the-scenes cleverness," she says. But what is the South African reality that builds meaning? Meaning is generated not by consensus of the ANC and how it sees SA, but by a consensus that binds all, irrespective of political allegiance to a party. Reality is the place of thought people are able to go to that does not distort through violent defence mechanisms and enactments. The Constitution is one such place of thought. SA’s universities should also strive to be such a place, where thinking generates meaning and the reflexive interrogation of life. They could be institutions that bind South Africans in ways that promote connection in a caring way, showing reality because it allows people to think rather than distort. The language used by some political parties, movements and leaders creates a state of confusion. At the recent ANC policy conference multiple voices, supposedly bound by an organisational or cultural language of uniformity, spoke in contradictions, which distorts reality. It distorts because it deploys double-speak. Nothing is what it should be. It creates what some theorists would call a double-bind. Multiple and contradictory injunctions are made, resulting in the actors becoming paralysed. There is no escape to a metabolising object and emotions cannot be trusted. Factionalism is attacking the possibility of thought in the ANC. Factionalism is based in aggression and uses malice to help undermine benign consensus. It has the securing of power as its only agenda. The abstract, group psychic interiority of the ANC seems too fragile to promote a complex relationship with reality. This is evident in the hostile relationship towards the media, the inability to halt the collapse of state-owned enterprises, the targeting of the Reserve Bank and the grotesque relationship with the Gupta family. Emotional patterns of suspicion, withdrawal to an inner world that can be controlled, attacks directed at the outside, being detached and adrift suggest a strong desire of "I do not want to know. I want to create an omnipotent world where I control everything and I also attack everything." The idea of abstraction becomes replaced by the concrete. In a particularly vulgar form, this is the concreteness of money. Material acquisition becomes a fetish. In psychological terms a fetish implies a strongly ritualised set of behaviours that must be in place in order for pleasure to be derived. Relationships become rigid and reduced to objects of barter. The corrupt acquisition of wealth and purchasing the ability to exploit is moving towards the realm of the psychotic and done as an attack on reality in the hope a new and deranged private reality can be established and money can make it "just the way I want it to be". In addition, the paranoid view of the obsessive is that evil forces are conspiring to facilitate his downfall. This is why the post-truth world is so dangerous. In distorting and evading, the entry point for a collapse into a cultural psychosis is expanded. Nothing can be trusted. Therefore our collective minds cannot find anchoring points to link. The post-truth narrative is that psychological linking is not required because meaning in the sense of truth is a hollow construct. And the more we attack or think we can evade links and meaning, the more people of perverse and psychopathic power can exploit and build a world primed for chaos. Truth is painful. In clinical encounters, to seek truth is to have to confront something we do not wish to know. If we are not open to the idea of truth and therefore of reality, then the notion of thinking ceases to have meaning. This is in part why attacks on the Constitution are so dangerous. It sets the stage for denying meaning and a consensus-building reality. Clinically, when working with a patient who presents with a psychotic disorder, we have to find the parts of the mind that are free from psychosis, however small. We have to engage those parts and speak to the parts that do have contact with reality. The same has to happen on a cultural level. The people who speak truth to malice and (disfigured) power are the people striving to make contact with reality and to pull larger parts of the pathological collective and political mind towards meaning. If not, we might all go mad. • Rabie is a clinical psychologist in private practice in Cape Town. 