The African private tertiary education space is hotting up. Last week global investment firm Actis showed its intention to capitalise on the potential growth of private education in Africa with the launch of its Honoris United Universities, a Pan-African investment vehicle targeting tertiary opportunities. This followed a decision by Actis, which has been investing in African private education since 2014, to make a strong foray into the South African market through the acquisition of distance learning specialists the Management College of Southern Africa (Mancosa) and the Regent Business School for an undisclosed sum. Both tertiary brands offer accredited, accessible and affordable education and follows recent corporate activity trends in the fragmented local private tertiary education sector. In the past 18 months, fast-growing listed education counters such as PSG-controlled Curro Holdings and Advtech have broadened their tertiary reach, while investment companies RECM & Calibre (College SA) and PSG Alpha Investments (FutureLearn and ITSI) have fortified their specialist positions. So far, however, Curro and Advtech have only made cautious moves into selected African markets. Actis kicked off its African education ventures in late 2014 when it made an investment in Université Centrale Group, a post-secondary-education group in Tunisia. In 2016, the platform expanded to Morocco, creating a Northern African hub through its investment in Université Mundiapolis. Coinciding with the acquisition of Mancosa and Regent was the announcement that Actis had also invested in Ecole Marocaine des Sciences de l’Ingénieur — the largest private institution in Morocco and the leading private engineering school. Collectively Actis’ Honoris United Universities will offer more than 100 degrees — including health sciences, engineering, information technology, business, law, architecture, arts and design, media, education and political science. According to a fact sheet, Honoris will hold an enterprise value of $275m, comprising 48 campuses that accommodate 27,000 students across nine countries. Actis partner David Cooke said Honoris had set a target of 100,000 students within three to five years. The firm also estimated that 50% of the student base would be from SA. Cooke said Actis had built extensive experience in private education, having invested 500m in such opportunities in China, Brazil and Africa in recent years. Asked whether a scramble for private tertiary assets might raise vendors’ pricing expectations markedly, Cooke said the Honoris expansion model was slightly different in that it was offering participation on a Pan-African platform. A listing for Honoris could be on the cards in the longer term, Cooke said. "There could be a potential opportunity to allow access to Honoris to outside investors. So yes, a listing is something we are likely to consider at some point." Curro’s private education subsidiary Stadio Holdings has signalled its intention to list later in 2017.