Human Settlements Minister Lindiwe Sisulu, an ANC presidential candidate, says the ANC Women’s League is wrong in endorsing Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma to succeed President Jacob Zuma. Speaking during an interview with the SAfm on Monday morning, Sisulu said anyone nominated by ANC branches can contest for the party’s presidency. "First the ANC Women’s League said it is now time for a woman to lead the organisation. Then they said the only woman who is qualified and ready to lead the ANC is Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma," Sisulu said. "I think it is wrong for them to say that. It is not only wrong, it is also undemocratic. Any candidate who is nominated by the branches can go to the ANC conference and stand for the position," she said. Sisulu enters the ANC presidential race just five months before the ANC elective conference in December. President Jacob Zuma has endorsed Dlamini-Zuma — a former African Union leader and also his ex-wife — to succeed him. Cosatu has thrown weight behind Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa to lead the party and the country. Sisulu kicked off her presidential campaign in Kliptown, Soweto, on Saturday pledging to help save the ANC from infighting and corruption, and saying she would help the party get back to its roots. "I would like you to stand with me, because we have to save the ANC. Saving the ANC is to save SA," she said. Sisulu said she chose Kliptown to launch her campaign as it was the site of her parliamentary constituency office and because the area had pride of place in the history of the struggle against apartheid and injustice. "I would like to change a number of things if I become the president of the ANC. The ANC has lost ground. It happened before my eyes when we lost Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality, we lost Tshwane, and we lost Johannesburg," said Sisulu. "It is clear that people were telling us that something wrong is happening. We need to change." Sisulu said there was an urgent need for the ANC to reclaim its former glory. The trove of leaked e-mails detailing the dealings between key government officials and the controversial Gupta family, was tarnishing the image of the ANC. She also reiterated that Zuma had to face up to fraud and corruption charges and clear his name in court.