SA’s crime intelligence boss has not received top-secret security clearance despite being in the job for more than a month. The delay in giving clearance to newly appointed acting head of national crime intelligence Pat Mokushane is due to his failure to provide documents‚ including bank statements‚ proof of tertiary qualifications and his matric certificate. Revelations that Mokushane has failed to provide the most basic of documents brings into question the vetting process that allowed him clearance for his former post as head of crime intelligence in Gauteng. It is understood Mokushane tried in vain to approach State Security Minister David Mahlobo in a bid to have the vetting process abolished. A source who declined to be named said Mokushane had managed to secure the postponement of a security vetting panel meeting scheduled for July 4. According to correspondence‚ the panel was to discuss the new crime intelligence head’s security clearance. Mokushane allegedly told Mahlobo‚ who declined to comment on Saturday‚ that he could not provide the documents being requested by investigators and wanted Mahlobo to intervene. The source claimed Mahlobo told Mokushane to follow the process. Police spokeswoman Sally de Beer declined to comment on detailed questions sent last week and did not confirm or deny that Mokushane had clearance. "This matter will be dealt with internally and not via the media‚" she said. Media reports have indicated that Mokushane had a criminal record for violating the National Road Traffic Act in 2002‚ was arrested in 1993 for possession of suspected stolen property and was a member "in good standing" of the Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans Association. It is understood the issue of his criminal record does not factor as a reason for the refusal of his security clearance. Mokushane was appointed on June 17 and caused an uproar in his first week when he announced a restructuring of the crime intelligence national head office in Pretoria. In June, Parliament’s standing committee on police also raised the issue of his security clearance‚ asking why the appointment was made before having the clearance certificate "on the file". Business Day sent Mokushane questions on Saturday‚ but he did not respond.