Business Day asked CEO and founder Magda Wierzycka whether going offshore was such a good idea. The expansion into the UK is not about ETF expansion unless it’s in the more interesting space like our fourth industrial revolution global equity fund, which is unique. The reason the UK market is interesting is because the regulatory environment is very similar to that of SA. The other thing is that there is a huge drive by the regulators to try and lower the cost of financial services provision. The second point is that just like in the US, there is an emergence of a whole lot of fintech start-ups … and all of those companies are finding a very receptive audience. The world is shifting away from these established brands … so what I’m looking at is a LISP [linked investment service provider] platform and the robo adviser market and mobile banking … using the technologies we have developed in SA to infuse that in a platform business with an established entrepreneurial team. I now have a track record in taking start-ups and growing them to medium-sized companies, at least. So it’s more that than trying to compete on five basis points with Vanguard in the ETF market. Have you been forced into this move, to some extent? You said asset management in SA was shrinking. I’m hoping that we have established a much broader footprint than just being an asset manager – we’ve got our LISP platforms, our savings products, the administration business and the umbrella funds so there’s a lot of scope for growth in each of these areas. The savings pool in SA is shrinking with widespread retrenchments … there are no jobs being created that would introduce new savers into the pool. But we are looking at the growth of the passive market and that is in its infancy in SA. Really, it’s a drop in the ocean. The other driver is the umbrella-funds market, which is completely ripe for disruption. It’s a very opaque, overcharged segment of the institutional industry … so I’m actually quite optimistic about growth in SA. On the international side, I’ve always been a believer that we have to have multiple lines in the water, because if you aren’t fishing you aren’t catching anything. And we only need to catch an occasional whale. It’s important to start initiatives because the lead times … between when you start and when you have a sense whether it will be successful, is between two and three years. We might as well start small and see what happens. If it yields something, it could be lucrative. The DBX deal is interesting — it could be a big kicker for Sygnia even as, in the past, you’ve been critical of ETFs? If you look at ETFs, it is the most complex product structure sold in the financial services industry … it’s been rife with tiers and layers of costs that are not necessarily apparent when you look at the ETF itself. You cannot just buy [an ETF] outright without incurring a whole host of other costs — from platform fees, to stockbroking fees, JSE trading costs, etc. ETFs are fine, but it’s the cost of access and that’s a cottage industry in SA. There are a few platform providers charging astronomical fees … it’s ripe for disruption. It’s basically lowering the cost of access to virtually nothing. Have you considered using any of the other exchanges to launch or move some of your funds, like ZAR X, or A2X? I’ve looked at the other exchanges, but because they don’t have scale, they are expensive. Obviously, they market to us, but they’re still more expensive than the JSE, and it’s weird. They introduce weird charging structures. For instance, you have to pay 1% brokerage to buy a share on the exchange. Seriously? It’s been interesting to see you become increasingly vocal as a business leader. My view is [that] if SA continues on its current path politically then economically we are stuffed. Unemployment is going to get worse, poverty is going to get worse, crime is going to get worse. People are going to emigrate. Instead of having sound economic debates, the only debate on the table is political shuffling and infighting. We don’t have a choice but to fight for a free and fair SA, to fight this corruption. When you start counting, it’s maybe 2,000 people that are holding 55-million hostage. You can take the view that you’re just going to hide your head in the sand but, you know, I’ve been a refugee once and I don’t want to be another refugee; I don’t want to leave SA because the situation becomes untenable.