Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane has accused President Jacob Zuma of undermining the Chapter Nine institution by failing to comply with her predecessor’s remedial action to institute an inquiry into state capture. This is the second time Mkhwebane has accused the president of undermining the protector. In papers filed with the high court, Mkhwebane invoked the Constitutional Court’s judgment on Nkandla that reaffirmed the public protector’s powers by ruling that the office’s remedial action was binding and admonished the president for failing to comply with it. She also referred to the Supreme Court of Appeal finding in the Hlaudi Motsoeneng case that the public protector’s remedial action was binding. Crucially, in her affidavit Mkhwebane supports the remedial action of her predecessor, Thuli Madonsela, to institute an inquiry into state capture under a judge to be appointed by Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng. Zuma’s failure to comply with this undermined her office’s powers, she said. Mkhwebane filed her affidavit in response to the counterapplication lodged by Zuma for a stay of execution of the report’s remedial action. The public protector said she believed Zuma should have complied with the remedial action by December 2 2016. The president had instead opted to institute a review application on the State of Capture report. Mkhwebane said in her papers that it was incumbent on Zuma to bring an application to suspend the remedial action or apply for a stay of implementation, but he had not done so. Zuma had brought the counter-application only in response to the DA’s application to the court that it compel him to comply with the public protector’s remedial action. Mkhwebane said the president believed that "a mere launch of the review application" had the effect of staying the implementation of the remedial action in the report. "The failure of the president to do so is inconsistent with the rule of law, undermines the effectiveness of the public protector’s remedial action and is inconsistent with binding precedent of the Constitutional Court and the SCA [Supreme Court of Appeal]," she said. It was in the public interest that the mounting allegations of state capture be "swiftly investigated and tested", but delaying the implementation of the remedial action undermined this. Mkhwebane agreed with Madonsela that Mogoeng should appoint the judge to head an inquiry into state capture. The public protector said the president could not do this because he was an implicated party. There was "no tenable basis" on which the president could attack the remedial action, as section 96 of the Constitution, which dealt with the conduct of cabinet members, precluded the president from retaining control over an inquiry into state capture, Mkhwebane said.