BHP’s share price fell 1% to A$24.85 in Sydney on Wednesday morning after releasing its fourth-quarter production figures. The world’s largest mining group reported it intended to step up US oil production — ignoring calls to sell its offshore rigs — and grew its iron ore production 8%, adding to a global oversupply. BHP closed 1.52% lower at R220.11 on the JSE on Tuesday, contributing to a 1.05% drop in the all share index. Despite the drop in BHP’s share price, Sydney’s S&P/ASX 200 index was 0.83% higher ahead of the JSE’s opening. Shanghai’s composite index was 0.8% higher, but Tokyo’s Topix index was slightly down, making it difficult to guess if the JSE will rebound from Tuesday’s first stumble in six days. British American Tobacco is also expected to release an operation update on Wednesday. Thursday’s interest rate announcement by Reserve Bank governor Lesetja Kganyago will be foreshadowed by Statistics SA’s June consumer price index (CPI) report at 10am. The annual change in CPI is the key measure of inflation used by the Reserve Bank’s monetary policy committee to set the repo rate at which it lends to commercial banks. The economists’ consensus is inflation will have slowed to 5.2% in June from 5.4% in May, but the Reserve Bank is not expected to cut the repo rate from 7% to 6.75% until inflation slows to about 4.5% — the midpoint of its 3%-6% target range. Investec Bank economist Kamilla Kaplan said in her weekly economics forecast that inflation may slow to 5.1% in June. "The deceleration in June is premised on petrol and diesel price cuts of 25c/l and 23c/l respectively. Food prices typically decline in month-to-month terms in the month of June, and this year’s decline should exceed that of June 2016 on the downward pressure on grain prices underpinned by the favourable supply outlook. "Overall, inflation in some retail segments, such as clothing, furniture and appliances, has either moderated or contracted, reflecting the effects of past rand appreciation, the weak demand environment and likely, increased competitive forces." Statistics SA will release May’s retail trade sales at 1pm. This is a component of the trade segment of GDP that was the main culprit for dragging SA into a technical recession in the first quarter. The economists consensus is retail sales declined 0.3% in May from the same month in 2016 after improving by 1.5% in April. The Bureau for Economic Research’s recent consumer confidence results for the first half of 2017, which showed South Africans have remained pessimistic about committing themselves to debt for the past three years, indicate the retails sales figures will be dire. Shoprite’s share price fell 2.71% to R200 on Tuesday after it released an operational update for the 52 weeks to July 2 that showed sales only narrowly outpaced price inflation. Recent sales updates from Woolworths and Massmart similarly showed South African consumer-focused groups struggling to grow sales faster than inflation.