The executors of Nelson Mandela’s estate and his grandson, Mandla, have distanced themselves from a tell-all book written by the former president’s doctor. Advocate George Bizos‚ one of three executors of Mandela’s estate‚ said they "had nothing to do with it". Mandela’s former doctor, Vejay Ramlakan, claims he received permission to publish the books from the Mandela family but has refused to say who in the family provided the go-ahead. Said Bizos: "Mrs Machel is concerned and we are concerned. "While the writer says he had permission from one family member‚ I don’t think any single member has the authority to do that." Bizos said the executors planned on taking action. According to the Health Professions Council of SA‚ the only way a doctor can breach the doctor-patient confidentiality oath in relation to a deceased patient is with the written consent of the next of kin or the executor of the deceased’s estate. In a statement released on Sunday‚ Mandla Mandela said the family was "aggrieved" by Ramlakan’s book. He said the family gave its "unequivocal support" to Machel. Mandla Mandela said the privilege Ramlakan had "appears to have been vilely abused". "We are deeply disappointed that the doctor appears to have compromised himself and the man whom he had the privilege to serve‚" Mandla Mandela said in a statement. The South African Medical Association also expressed its concern. "I haven’t read the book but most of us have a sense of unease [about it]. Breaching the [code of ethics] has implications‚" said Dr Mark Sonderup‚ vice-chairperson of the association, a doctors’ representative group. "If it is found that [the book] violates principles [of medical ethics]‚ the matter should be reviewed by relevant authorities and action be taken‚" he said. Ramlakan’s book‚ published by Penguin Random House‚ hits shelves on Monday. In a television interview on Sunday‚ Ramlakan again said he had been requested by the family to write the book. "I would not like to disclose the dynamics of the family and who requested us because I think it’s irrelevant‚" he said. "We assert that we have received permission from the family." The publisher said Ramlakan had assured them he had received permission from the Mandela family and even handed a draft of the book to a family representative. The Department of Defence‚ which employed Ramlakan‚ has distanced itself from the controversial book while the Nelson Mandela Foundation refused to comment on the matter. "The SANDF’s policy on patient-doctor confidentiality is in force and as such the views and patient-doctor engagements expressed in the book have not been sanctioned by the senior cadre of the department and the SANDF respectively‚" South African National Defence Force spokesman Siphiwe Dlamini said. Marketing and publicity manager for Penguin Random House Amanda van Rhyn said the company was ready for any legal action that might come its way. "The book is already out. We did not anticipate the backlash we have been receiving. However‚ we are prepared should there be any legal action as a result of the book. "At this stage there are no plans to remove the book from shelves but that will obviously depend on what will come our way‚ then it will go to our lawyers. But for now it is business as usual‚" Van Rhyn said. In a statement released on the eve of the book’s launch‚ Penguin Random House SA said it had accepted the book for publication after the author had assured the company that he had received permission from a family member to write the book. This family member was also presented with a manuscript of the book. "Mandela’s Last Years sets the record straight about the final years of his life. Written by the head of his medical team‚ the military doctor who witnessed firsthand what the former president was experiencing‚ it documents the complex medical challenges‚ the interactions between family members and staff‚ the constant scrutiny from the press‚ and the actions and responses of Mandela himself‚" the statement read. "Written with respect and with the support of family members‚ this book completes the story of Nelson Mandela. It reveals a man who showed immense courage‚ not only when he fought for the freedom of millions of people‚ but until the very end of his own life."