London — Gold eased on Thursday as the dollar firmed ahead of a European Central Bank (ECB) meeting which will be watched for signs of officials moving away from an ultra-loose monetary policy. The ECB is expected to lay the groundwork for a northern autumn policy shift when it meets, after ECB chief Mario Draghi opened the door to tweaks in a speech in Portugal in June. The spot gold price was down 0.2% at $1,238.04/oz at 10.48am GMT, while US gold futures for August delivery were 0.4% lower to $1,237.40/oz. The euro was down 0.1% against the dollar before the policy decision, but hovered close to a recent a 14-month high. A stronger dollar tends to pressure assets priced in the US currency. "It has been currency swings and rate swings which have been driving gold as of late," Julius Baer analyst Carsten Menke said. "You still have speculation in the market that the ECB may shift to a less expansionary policy earlier than expected. We tend to disagree. "We think the potential for disappointment at the meeting today is bigger than the potential for a positive surprise, so this is rather something we see as gold negative from the currency side." Tighter monetary policy in the eurozone could be seen as either positive or negative for gold, depending on whether the market responds more favourably to a stronger euro, or less favourably to a rise in the opportunity cost of holding the nonyielding metal. The ultra-loose policy in place since the last decade’s global financial crisis has been a key factor supporting gold prices in recent years. With the end to that unprecedented stimulus now within sight, financial investors are nervously trying to gauge how big central banks around the globe will unwind unconventional policy that have kept borrowing costs ultra low. Holdings of the world’s largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund (ETF), SPDR Gold Shares, fell 5.3 tonnes on Wednesday to 816.1 tonnes, their lowest since early February. Its reserves have declined more than 12 tonnes so far this week. "Investors remained cautious heading into today’s ECB meeting," ANZ said in a note. In other precious metals, silver was down 0.4% to $16.17/oz after touching its highest in more than two weeks at $16.36 in the previous session. Platinum was 0.2% lower at $916.60/oz, while palladium was down 0.3% at $853.50/oz. It hit a three-week high of $872.25/oz on Wednesday. Reuters