The South African Social Services Agency (Sassa) has scrapped the advisory groups that were set up to plan for the future of the country’s more than $11bn (about R148.5bn) of annual welfare payments. Letters were sent to the so-called "work streams" last week informing them of their termination, Sassa CEO Thokozani Magwaza said in an interview at Bloomberg’s Joburg office on Monday. Magwaza said he had informed Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini of the decision and had not yet received a response. The advisory groups reported directly to the minister, effectively creating parallel structures to the agency’s management. The government is pushing to find a new system to pay welfare grants to more than 17-million recipients after the Constitutional Court in March allowed for a 12-month extension to the contract with Net1 UEPS Technologies, after earlier finding the deal was invalid. Any interruption to the programme could spark protests in poor communities where many households have no other income, and may hurt the ANC ahead of 2019 elections. The groups, appointed by the Dlamini two years ago, failed to find solutions and the agency was unable to take over welfare distribution by April this year, according to Magwaza. The Treasury had found that the setting up of the "work streams" was irregular. The decision may add to tension between Magwaza and the minister, who contradicted each other in affidavits submitted to the Constitutional Court. Dlamini was asked by the court to explain why she should not pay the costs of the legal case after the department, under her supervision, failed to find a replacement for Net1 after a 2014 ruling. A decision on her liability is yet to be made. The welfare agency plans to start phasing in a new contractor in November to comply with the court order, Dlamini told lawmakers in May. The minister’s spokesperson asked for e-mailed questions. Sole bidder The Treasury last week authorised Sassa to engage with the state-owned South African Post Office (Sapo) as the operator of the welfare-payment system, Magwaza said. While the Post Office said it was willing, and had the capacity to take over the payments, Sassa would still have to make sure the company could comply with the requirements, he said. "National Treasury has agreed that Sassa engages the Post Office as the sole bidder," Sassa spokesperson Paseka Letsatsi said by phone. "For government to appoint any body there must be a formal tender process followed, but this time Treasury is saying we are giving you a deviation to engage with the Post Office. If that doesn’t work out we can engage other bidders." Sapo’s Postbank obtained a provisional banking licence in 2016 and has applied for a formal permit. If it failed to meet the full requirements, Magwaza said "any company except Net1" would be considered, complying with the order by the Constitutional Court. Mark Barnes, the Post Office’s CEO, said by phone that he had not received official confirmation from Treasury. Bloomberg