The Reserve Bank is expected to keep interest rates unchanged when it announces its rates decision at its July monetary policy committee (MPC) meeting on Thursday. Governor Lesetja Kganyago will make the Bank’s rates announcement against a backdrop of easing inflation, which decreased marginally to 5.1% in June, according to Statistics SA data released on Wednesday. Economists are in agreement that the easing inflation may open the door for the Bank to cut interest rates, but this may be a reality only later in 2017. The Consumer Price Index (CPI), which measures changes in the price of goods and services purchased by households in urban areas, decreased 0.3 of a percentage point to 5.1% in June compared to 5.4% in May. This is the lowest level of inflation since November 2015. Momentum economist Sanisha Packirisamy said: "The MPC statement in May signalled an end to the rate-hiking cycle, while lower-than-expected growth … likely lowered the bar for interest rate cuts." Continuing disinflation was expected to result in a rise in real interest rates, Packirisamy said, which should allow the Bank to consider easing monetary policy by up to 50 basis points. However, the Bank was not expected to make cuts yet. "Interest rate cuts are likely to be deferred as rand risks, in light of continued political and sovereign ratings uncertainty, continue to provide an upside threat to the inflation trajectory," Packirisamy said. Inflation expectations were also still uncomfortably anchored at the top end of the inflation target band. BNP Paribas economist Jeff Schultz said the inflation slowdown would sit comfortably with the MPC. "We think that the Bank will use … [Thursday’s] statement to change the narrative on inflation and the rates outlook," he said. Nedbank economist Busi-siwe Radebe said the biggest threat to the inflation outlook remained the rand, which might temper the extent of the moderation in inflation. "The latest inflation figures, as well as the outlook for inflation for the remainder of the year, will increase speculation of an early easing in monetary policy. The key obstacle is the concern that a possible local currency downgrade could lead to renewed rand weakness and an immediate policy reversal," Radebe said. She forecasts the MPC will keep rates on hold until at least September, with more probable easing in early 2018. Investec chief economist Annabel Bishop said: "The [Reserve Bank] is unlikely to be pushed into a rate-cutting cycle by South African politics, and has instead been following a careful path." The recovery of agricultural production has helped ease inflation. Food price inflation, which accounts for 15.5% of the basket, remained steady at 7% year on year in June. KPMG economist Christie Viljoen said food price inflation had declined from levels above 10% year on year between April 2016 and February 2017 as good rains and higher plantings boosted agricultural prospects. Economists say lower agriculture product prices from the record maize surplus will continue to drive food prices lower.