Joburg mayor Herman Mashaba insists he will not use the city’s resources to house foreign nationals, putting himself on a collision course with those insisting on their constitutional rights. Mashaba said this week the city would build housing for South Africans, but it was not its responsibility to provide free housing to foreign nationals. Constitutional experts disagree, saying section 26 of the Constitution gives everyone, not only citizens, the right to adequate housing. There is a housing backlog of more than 300,000 households in Joburg, with the city only able to build about 2,000 houses in 2017 with government grants. Speaking to Business Day on Tuesday, Mashaba said he had no problem with building free houses for foreign nationals, if given the funding. "I am sure you are aware of the shortage of resources to build houses for our poor people in SA, in the City of Joburg. "I am saying my responsibility is to the people of this country. If ever anybody wants me to build houses [for foreign nationals], I will gladly do it as the City of Johannesburg. [But authorities] must give us the money," Mashaba said. Housing subsidised by the government and temporary housing were exclusively for South Africans, he said. Constitutional expert Pierre de Vos said section 26 applied to everyone, not only citizens. If people were evicted from, for instance, a condemned building, the city had a constitutional obligation to provide them with temporary emergency housing, De Vos said. "Once again, that applies to everyone. That does not only apply to South Africans, because the Constitution is not xenophobic," he said. Marinus Wiechers, emeritus professor at Unisa, said Mashaba’s statements on providing housing only to South Africans "contradict the Bill of Rights" in which section 26 is enshrined. Asked about the views of constitutional experts, Mashaba said: "Please ask them where must the city get the money?" Despite Mashaba’s comments, his spokesman, Luyanda Mfeka, said on Wednesday the city would continue to provide accommodation to residents, including temporary emergency accommodation to everyone, including foreign nationals, but government-subsidised houses were for citizens and permanent residents only. Mfeka said when the city was informed of an eviction that would render those evicted homeless, the city within available resources would seek to provide temporary accommodation to the affected residents in line with its obligations in terms of the Constitution. Mashaba will meet developers on Thursday to discuss his plan to make hijacked buildings in Johannesburg available to private investors. mailovichc@businesslive.co.za