This Week on the Frontiers, July 22 2017 Pakistan’s Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was in a fight for his political life last week as the country’s supreme court considered disqualifying him from office or putting him on trial on corruption charges, Saeed Shah reports. Sharif confronted questions over how his family acquired swank London apartments and an investigation ordered by the Supreme Court that accuses him and his children of living beyond their means, tax evasion and misdeclaration of assets as well as forgery and perjury in an attempted cover-up of the London property. Sharif has denied the allegations and called the report “a collection of assumptions, accusations and slander.” Aides have said he would continue to fight the allegations. The court concluded the hearings on Friday but did not state when it would issue a verdict. As the drama unfolded, Pakistan’s market see-sawed, gaining almost 3% early in the week, then giving up some of the gains to settle on Friday up slightly over 2%. Egypt’s progress on instituting economic reforms is improving the country’s credit profile, Moody’s said in a note last week. The reforms “will help reduce the nation’s fiscal and external vulnerabilities,” the firm said, adding that the relaxing of foreign exchange controls in November 2016 has been particularly helpful. Moody’s said Egypt’s current account deficit, which has stabilised at 6.5% of GDP, should gradually decline to around 3% of GDP by the end of the 2020 fiscal year. Nearly two decades of US-led international economic sanctions, which the US delayed lifting last week, have locked Sudan out of the Western financial system and spooked many investors. But the financial isolation has fostered a special kind of business acumen, Matina Stevis reports from Khartoum. In executive suites and sand-caked streets, businesses in this former colonial outpost of 40 million people are working to snare alternative sources of finance, sidestep trade barriers and find creative ways to import consumer goods. Political instability in Zambia could threaten its economy if it undermines lenders’ confidence in the southern African country, Fitch said last week. “Political stability has been a rating strength for Zambia, which has experienced less political violence or election-related instability than many [comparable] sovereigns,” the ratings firm said. Recent moves by the Zambian President Edgar Lungu to establish a state of emergency amid a rising level of domestic unrest are raising concerns among investors, and could, the firm warned, “jeopardise the IMF’s and other lenders’ willingness to provide Zambia with external financing.” Fitch also warned that the Republic of Congo could be heading for a default. Noting that the country was late in paying principal and interest on some 2029-dated bonds, the company said a failure to pay the amounts by the end of a 30-day grace period would constitute a default. According to Fitch, the country has transferred the funds for payment to a custodian but a restraining notice issued by “a former contractor of the Republic of Congo” has frozen the payments. The biggest African economies are likely to loosen monetary policy this year, with some making deep cuts to interest rates, according to London-based Capital Economics. John Ashbourne, the firm’s Africa economist, said he expects South Africa, Nigeria, Angola and Kenya to follow in the footsteps of Ghana, Mozambique, Uganda and Zambia, which have already begun easing rates. Monetary policy makers are expected to make the moves as inflation declines and currencies across the region stabilise after a tumultuous spell in 2015 and 2016. ”We think that policymakers in Ghana, Zambia and Mozambique will go furthest,” Ashbourne said. He anticipates Ghana will cut rates by as much as 7.5 percentage points after having sharply increased them in recent years. One country that is unlikely to cut rates further is Uganda, according to research firm BMI. “Although we believe that inflation will continue to decline over coming months…we are forecasting that the policy rate will remain at its current level for the remainder of 2017 and through 2018,” the firm said. The Trump administration said it was prepared to impose “strong and swift” economic sanctions on Venezuela, including banning its crude-oil exports to the US, if its president moves ahead with a plan to rewrite the country’s constitution, Ian Talley and Kejal Vyas report. President Nicolás Maduro plans to hold a national election on July 30 to pick a new constituent assembly with the power to rewrite the constitution, bypassing the existing congress under the opposition’s control. “We can promise that whatever actions we choose to take after July 30th will be strong, swift and deliberate,” the official said. “All options are on the table, all options are being discussed and debated.” On Thursday, streets of the country’s capital Caracas were mostly deserted, as the opposition staged a 24-hour general strike in a last-ditch attempt to force Maduro to abandon his plan to rewrite the constitution. Most residents stayed home and businesses were closed, further depressing the country’s feeble economy. Members of opposition groups erected barricades to block any remaining traffic. Ecuador backtracked on a pledge to break ranks from agreed Opec cuts, following a Saudi phone call, Benoit Faucon reports. In a statement posted on his ministry’s Website late on Tuesday, the country’s oil minister Carlos Perez said he had a “fruitful conversation” with Saudi oil minister Khalid al-Falih, Opec’s de facto leader, and “we reiterate our support for the Organisation and the actions implemented.” The remarks come after Perez said his country could no longer afford to respect its commitment to reduce production by 26,000 barrels per day, agreed as part of a deal between Opec and non-Opec producers to cut output renewed in May.