Treasury has controversially proposed removing the foreign employment income tax exemption for South African residents working abroad, from March 1 2019. The Treasury deputy director-general Ismail Momoniat, said on Wednesday that the aim was to make sure the tax system was fair to all and that people did not exploit offshore tax havens. But the proposed measure is likely to be strongly opposed by tax practitioners. It is contained in the Draft Taxation Laws Amendment Bill of 2017, which was released Wednesday for public comment, together with the Draft Tax Administration Laws Amendment Bill. These two bills, together with the Draft Rates and Monetary Amounts and Amendment of Revenues Laws Bill, which was published in February, give effect to the tax proposals announced in the budget. Treasury and the South African Revenue Service (SARS) plan to hold workshops with stakeholders on the draft proposals; Parliament’s finance committee will also hold public hearings on the bills. Treasury chief director of legal tax design Yanga Mputa explained the background to the withdrawal of the foreign employment income tax exemption, which applied to work done outside the country for more than 183 days. She said the exemption was introduced to alleviate the tax burden on employees, but Treasury had found there were situations in which no income tax was paid in SA or in the foreign country. In some countries, such as the United Arab Emirates, no income tax is paid. The withdrawal of the exemption would mean that tax would be paid on worldwide income in SA, whatever the length of time worked abroad, though tax credits would be recognised for foreign taxes paid. Mputa said that in the two years before the implementation date of March 1 2019, Treasury and SARS would iron out administrative difficulties and work out what proof employees would have to submit and how they could claim tax credits for foreign taxes paid. Employers would also need time to re-work contracts where these were structured on the basis that no tax would be paid in SA. PwC tax policy leader Kyle Mandy said the measure went a lot further than the proposal in the budget, which was only to subject foreign income of South Africans working abroad to tax in SA if they were not subject to foreign tax. "This is going to be a very controversial," Mandy said. He did not believe the measure would raise the kind of revenue Treasury thought it would as many South Africans working in foreign countries with which SA has double taxation treaties had migrated their tax residences there. This meant that SA would not have any taxing rights over their income. The administrative burden of collecting the tax would also be a challenge, Mandy said. The bill also proposes a 10% levy on bargaining councils to address their tax non-compliance in the past. Mputa said that, over the years, the bargaining councils had failed to withhold PAYE on holiday and sick-leave pay for workers. If they were made to pay the full amount owing in taxes, penalties and interest for previous years they would go under, so Treasury decided on a levy of 10% on the taxes they should have paid for the last five years from March 2012 to February 2017. This relief will be open until end-September 2018 after which they will be required to pay all the tax owing. Another key issue in the bill deals with mining environmental rehabilitation funds that have been used for other purposes. Contributions to rehabilitation funds are tax deductible and the growth in the funds is tax free. If mines deplete their rehabilitation funds, it is left to the state to pick up the rehabilitation costs. Mputa said the bill will introduce a reporting requirement to SARS whenever funds are withdrawn and financial reports will have to be submitted annually to Treasury.