Having lectured international politics for a number of years, I have come to the conclusion that although many socioeconomic factors, such as poverty, inequality, nationalism and global warming, play a huge role in causing national and international conflict, religious differences increasingly, cause mistrust, animosity, misunderstanding and conflict. Although this might sound idealistic, human beings, if united, could overcome enormous obstacles. Yet, here in the 21st century, religious differences are still dividing us, holding us back from reaching our full potential. Human unity and peace are made unattainable because religion segregates people into clusters of believers and "nonbelievers". Religion instills in people the idea that those who differ with their religious beliefs are evil and undeserving of association, or even of their humanity. In the words of British philosopher, historian and logician Bertrand Russell: "I regard religion as a disease born of fear and a source of untold misery to the human race." Through the ages leaders and governments, secular or religious, have tried to manipulate the truth for their own advantage. Modern-day politicians are no different. They control the narrative to provide the masses with a sense of false security. Lies told by politicians last for a limited time before they are exposed. Lies told by the religious can last for centuries. The irrational belief that "my god is the true god and therefore better than your god", has caused innumerable wars, slaughter and misery for countless people. Long before the September 9 2001 terrorist attack on the US and subsequent co-ordinated terror attacks in Beirut and Paris, as well as in Libya, Australia, Tunisia, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Ethiopia, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Lebanon, Israel and Russia, religious wars have been waged in the name of one or another of the almost 5,000 gods that have been worshipped by humans through the ages. Has humanity not suffered enough? After the London attacks and Manchester bombing involving the random killing of civilians, British Prime Minister Theresa May declared that "terrorism is now breeding terrorism, it is a complex threat". The intent to do harm in the name of religion, especially to western democracies, is now significant. Islamist terror and the wars in Iraq, Syria, Nigeria and elsewhere have resulted in a sense of resignation. It is as if idiotic young men with dreams of 72 virgins and misinterpreted verses in the Koran are holding civilisation at ransom. If people wish to believe in an omnipotent deity, unsubstantiated myths, fairy tales, a flat 6,000-year-old earth, talking snakes, the spaghetti monster or whatever, let them do so. However, they should not be allowed to forcefully impose those beliefs, or "truths" on others, and especially not on susceptible children. For me "god" was created by humans in their own image, not the other way round. The "holy books" of all religions are merely collections of egotistical Bronze Age tribal myths, embraced and rationalised by ill-informed communities who tried to make sense of their prescientific world. These archaic scripts are still the source of much conflict in the world today. Fundamentalists deny the existence of thousands of gods avowed by other religions but feel infuriated when someone denies the existence of their deity. That is why terrorism and other forms of misery are usually the product of religion. Religion is associated with war, terror, rape, the Crusades, the Inquisition, the 9/11 attacks, the suppression of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender persons, fatwas, slavery, torture, genocide, honour killings, maiming, suicide bombings, kidnapping, arranged marriages to minors, human sacrifice, beheadings, burning of witches, child soldiers, genital mutilation and underage sex. Thinking scientifically means being open-minded to the possibility of being wrong. Religions seldom accept evidence that is contrary to the prevailing dogma. Religion has thus never been kind to science, human knowledge or progress. In many countries populations are still being suppressed by leaders who seek to limit access to and the progression of human knowledge. Religion contends and texts are even quoted, supporting the view that it is not humankind’s place to understand and question things and to seek knowledge of our world. Having worked for thousands of years, these religious tactics keep people locked in a state of ignorance. Since we know that it is people who wrote the "holy texts", it follows logically that it is not God who wished to keep us in ignorance, but those who wrote the books, shaped our religious canons and vowed that the pursuit of knowledge is evil. By impeding humanity’s mental progress, religion hampers the quality of our lives, health and environment. It should not be acceptable for an adult to "believe like a child". Asking questions is how one eventually discovers one’s freedom. There is simply no polite way anymore to tell people they have dedicated their lives to an illusion. From a sociopolitical point of view, the problem with religion is that it propagates a cycle of division in societies. That division causes an intractable disruption that allows the domestic perversion that destroys nations. As opposed to a unified society, a divided community has no power to resist tyranny or corruption, and those in power are well aware of that fact. As Karl Marx said, religion acts like a painkiller, an opiate, that stupefies people and resigns them to their wretched conditions "as part of God’s plan". The blending of government and religion should therefore be regarded as a threat to free government, as seen especially today in several Islamic theocracies. When a government endorses a particular religion it conveys a message of segregation to all those who do not adhere to the favoured belief. Likewise, symptoms of Europe’s uneasy secular identity, now and in the past, are to be seen everywhere: discord over the Muslim hidjab, and other symbols of religious attachment; protests against discriminatory blasphemy laws; equal treatment for creationism and evolutionary theory in schools … the list goes on. Right-wing Jews, Muslims, Hindus, Christians and Roman Catholics may despise each other, but inherently they all share one frightful and pointless belief: the unproven conviction that they and they alone are morally right and that the rest or "others" can therefore be conquered, converted and even killed ... and they all say God is on their side! In all of this, the so-called "compassion" of God is nowhere to be seen, while empathy for humans is diluted by ludicrous ideas about sin and salvation. Anthropological studies have proven that religion has been dividing human society for more than 2,000 years. The most horrifying and absurd parts of "holy texts" are overlooked or sugar-coated and then deceptively administered to the people in a mental parcel branded as "God is love". As Sam Harris puts it: "People have been cherry-picking the Bible for millennia to justify their every impulse, moral or otherwise." Of course, one should be careful not to generalise. It is not always religion that divides us. Some of today’s most aggressive states are not being driven by religious considerations — think Russia, China and North Korea (the latter two are officially atheist). Also, the first and second world wars were not fought over religion; the rival alliances in both were multireligious. Yet it remains true in the 21st century that it is religion, more than any other factor, that divides humanity and poses the greatest threat to its progress and survival. Although only a handful of states in the contemporary world aspire to truly theocratic rule, there seems to be a backlash against secularism and a call for a "return to religious values", even sweeping over many democratic states today. Many of the citizens of these states seem oblivious to what a theocratic society actually entails. A study of modern and past theocratic societies reveals how oppressive religiously governed regimes are towards their own people. The harsh treatment being meted out to people in previously Islamic State-controlled territories, such as Mosul, is a practical example. Societies dissolve beneath the domination of religious oppression, while women are denigrated, mutilated and controlled by governments whose religious rule makes such atrocities "customary". Religion has caused more terror, torture and murder than any other phenomenon on earth. With their tyrannical messages and directives for blind and tedious obedience, "holy texts" are all too often violent and utterly useless as solutions to 21st-century challenges. They contain lies, immoral edicts and fictitious histories, no matter which of the many versions you may choose to read. The time for teaching these tall tales and nonsense to children and terrifying them with eternal hell has long passed. Of course, it would be difficult to simply eradicate religion. Plato said that man is a rational, emotional and spiritual being. Spirituality therefore should be seen as an inherent feature of human life. Human beings have had a fascination with the mysteries of life and our environment for centuries. However, being spiritual is not necessarily being religious, which is conflict-ridden, bound to dogma and plagued by divisiveness. It is disturbing that so many people in so many countries are so pessimistic about the world that they can only find hope in fantasies of apocalyptic catastrophe and an otherworldly afterlife. While the earth bursts with life, the far right’s exclusionary religion bursts with death. • Georghiou, a former diplomat, is a senior lecturer in international politics and political science at the University of Johannesburg.