Eskom’s annual results presentation on Wednesday will be closely watched after it was reported that the parastatal is facing a severe cash crisis. Eskom is at the centre of the allegations around state capture, which have severely dented the credibility of President Jacob Zuma’s administration and resulted in paralysis in the state and the governing party. Zuma has announced that he would set up a judicial commission of inquiry into state capture as revelations on the extent of the Gupta family’s influence over his government continue to be exposed through leaked e-mails. However, the president has not yet done so, despite a call by the ANC for the inquiry to be set up urgently. The state capture revelations have also damaged the ANC brand, resulting in the South African Communist Party (SACP) at its national congress deciding to contest elections on its own. The move could spell the death of the alliance, which has governed SA since 1994. Save SA, the Ahmed Kathrada Foundation, churches and nongovernmental organisations will on Monday make an announcement on the upcoming Conference for the Future of SA. This initiative marks yet another effort to lead society as the ANC remains divided and paralysed in the face of the crisis it faces. ANC MP Makhosi Khoza, who has been outspoken about her intention to vote with her conscience in a no-confidence vote against Zuma, is set to address the Conference for the Future of SA, which will take place on Tuesday at the Rhema Church in Randburg. Speaker of Parliament Baleka Mbete will also be closely watched this week for a possible decision on whether she will allow an open or secret ballot during the motion against Zuma, which is scheduled to take place on August 8. Mbete in a statement confirmed receiving submissions from nine of the 13 political parties in Parliament. She said the ANC and DA had said they would abide by her decision, while the remaining seven political parties had requested a secret ballot. Mbete is also in the hot seat after opposition parties questioned her ability to preside over the motion in a non-partisan manner. The Speaker has indicated that she was vying for the position of president when the ANC elects new leadership in December. Her announcement followed the party’s policy conference. Since then, each week has resulted in the emergence of new contenders for the post: Lindiwe Sisulu and Zweli Mkhize. The succession space will be closely watched for further developments. On Monday, the Banking Association SA and the South African National Editors Forum will hold a briefing by Banking Association SA MD Cas Coovadia on legislation affecting the banking sector and transformation in the sector, which came under the spotlight at the ANC policy conference as well as at the SACP national congress last week. The country will mark Mandela Day on Tuesday, to commemorate the former president’s birthday with 67 minutes of service to others.