The Black Sash is concerned that the departure of South African Security Agency (Sassa) CEO Thokozani Magwaza might affect the agency’s ability to fulfil the mandate set by the Constitutional Court. The Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu), meanwhile, has castigated Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini over her role in the social grants crisis, saying it expects "the ANC to demand answers from its minister". The court has given Sassa one year to prepare itself to take over the social grants system from the current service provider, Cash Paymaster Services (CPS), whose contract was extended for a further year to allow for this. Magwaza was driving the takeover process. The Department of Social Development announced on Monday that Dlamini and Magwaza had reached an agreement for him to leave. Insiders report that the relationship between the two had broken down irretrievably largely because Magwaza did not accept the minister’s interference in the work of the agency. "Of particular concern is whether Sassa will lawfully procure services timeously to ensure the proper functioning and integrity of the Sassa national payment system, as per its first report to the Constitutional Court, with the view to take over its full mandate," Black Sash national director Lynnette Maart said on Tuesday. "SA, and grant beneficiaries in particular, should not have to experience a further extension of the invalid CPS contract, as was the case in March this year." Maart also hoped Magwaza’s exit from Sassa would not place in jeopardy the outstanding Constitutional Court matter on whether Dlamini should be held liable for legal costs associated with Sassa’s lack of readiness to take over the grants payment system from CPS in April this year. The investigation of the parallel work streams, which Dlamini set up and which Magwaza terminated, should also go ahead, she stressed. The work streams were deemed irregular by Treasury. Maart noted that Magwaza’s exit followed reports of death threats, which she said showed "a worrying trend of senior government officials being intimidated in the course of performing their work. Former director-general of social development Zane Dangor suffered the same fate with death threats and violence prior and following his resignation." Meanwhile, the Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse surmised that Magwaza left because his work environment had become "unbearable" due to the death threats, the tension with Dlamini, Magwaza’s closure of the minister’s lucrative work streams and his attempts to get the South African Post Office (Sapo) to take over the social grants delivery. Outa portfolio director Dominique Msibi said that "once again, as in many state entities, a hardworking, ethical person has been removed. We trust that his good work will not be undone and that his replacement will work equally hard to address the maladministration and corruption within the social grants system." Cosatu Labour federation Cosatu said Dlamini had become a liability to the department and strongly condemned the intimidation tactics and death threats that had been directed against Magwaza. "It is not a coincidence that Mr Magwaza was pushed out while he was due to file papers to the Constitutional Court on why Minister Bathabile Dlamini should fork out legal costs from her own pocket," Cosatu said in a statement. The federation said it was unacceptable that Dlamini was weakening the department and Sassa by getting rid of the senior managers when the Constitutional Court had bent over backwards to fix the mess that had put the livelihoods of 17-million grant beneficiaries at stake. "The same minister previously pushed out of the department the former director-general Zane Dangor, one of the most experienced leaders in government, who knew the sector very well. "The minister must take full responsibility for this mess and we expect the ANC to demand answers from its minister, when the wheels are coming off and people’s livelihoods are compromised."