Manchester — British police said on Tuesday they had arrested a 23-year-old man in connection with a terrorist attack at a pop concert in Manchester that killed 22 people and injured dozens more. Islamic State has claimed responsibility for the attack, saying on its social media channels that “one of the caliphate’s soldiers placed bombs among the crowds”, and threatening more attacks. “With regards to the ongoing investigation into last night’s horrific attack at the Manchester Arena, we can confirm we have arrested a 23-year-old man in South Manchester,” police said in a statement. Police also said they knew the identity of the attacker, but were not disclosing it yet. The 22 people who died in the attack included children, and 59 people were wounded, when a suicide bomber struck as thousands of fans streamed out of a concert by US singer Ariana Grande in the northern English city on Monday night. Police had earlier said they believed the attacker, who died in the attack, had worked alone but were investigating whether this was the case. A shopping mall in the city, the Arndale centre, was evacuated on Tuesday morning after a bang was reported. People were seen running from the centre, but it was later reopened. British Prime Minister Theresa May called an emergency meeting with intelligence chiefs on the attack - the deadliest militant assault in Britain since 2005 - and London Mayor Sadiq Khan said more police had been ordered onto the streets of the British capital. May, who initially said the incident was being treated as a terrorist attack, later said there was no doubt that that was what Britain was dealing with. It was the deadliest militant assault in Britain since four British Muslims killed 52 people in suicide bombings on London’s transport system in July 2005. Police said the attacker detonated the explosives shortly after 10.33pm at Manchester Arena, which has the capacity to hold 21,000 people. Children were among the dead, police said. "The priority is to establish whether he was acting alone or as part of a network," Manchester Chief Constable Ian Hopkins said. "We believe the attacker was carrying an improvised explosive device which he detonated, causing this atrocity," said Hopkins, who declined to answer questions about whether the attacker was British. He did, however, confirm that the attacker had died in the blast. May, who faces an election in two-and-a-half weeks, said her thoughts were with the victims and their families. She and Jeremy Corbyn, the leader of the opposition Labour Party, agreed to suspend campaigning ahead of the June 8 election. "We are working to establish the full details of what is being treated by the police as an appalling terrorist attack," May said in a statement. "All our thoughts are with the victims and the families of those who have been affected." Finance minister Philip Hammond said he would cut short a trip to Brussels to return to London. Suicide bomber? There was no immediate claim of responsibility, but US officials drew parallels to the coordinated attacks in November 2015 by Islamist militants on the Bataclan concert hall and other sites in Paris, which claimed about 130 lives. British police were on alert for any further attacks. Central London’s Victoria coach station and roads around it were closed after discovery of a suspect package, the BBC said. Islamic State supporters took to social media to celebrate the blast and some encouraged similar attacks elsewhere. Britain is on its second-highest alert level of "severe", meaning an attack by militants is considered highly likely. British counter-terrorism police have said they are making on average an arrest every day in connection with suspected terrorism. In March, a British-born convert to Islam ploughed a car into pedestrians on London’s Westminster Bridge, killing four people before stabbing to death a police officer who was on the grounds of parliament. The man was shot dead at the scene. In 2015, Pakistani student Abid Naseer was convicted in a US court of conspiring with al Qaeda to blow up the Arndale shopping centre in the centre of Manchester in April 2009. Reuters, AFP and Bloomberg