TFG is the latest retailer to enter the Australian market, announcing on Thursday that it would acquire menswear group, Retail Apparel Group (RAG), for up to R3bn. CEO Doug Murray said the move was a strategic decision aimed at diversifying income streams, but analysts expressed concerns about the entry into the Australian market, saying South African retailers had struggled in that country. TFG’s share price dropped 5.79% to close at R132.34. Murray said that diversifying the business through the acquisition of a well-run and well-managed company such as RAG made good business sense. "Australian retailers have easily come to our backyard and we have always thought that we could trade there. "We know Australian retail is very tough, but it is also tough here at home, one just has to look at the figures coming out of retailers. "But RAG is an outstanding business, with a great trade record. The business is of size, but not so big that it will cause risk to the mother ship," Murray said. TFG said that it would pay cash, and the agreed price was capped at seven times RAG’s audited normalised earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (ebitda) for the year to June 2017, up to a maximum of A$302.5m, or R3bn. Electus Fund Managers equity analyst Damon Buss said South African businesses that made acquisitions in Australia had generally struggled as the market was extremely competitive. These included Woolworths and Mr Price. Buss said RAG’s revenue (compound annual growth rate) over the past three years compared with ebitda indicated that margins were declining. "The Australian consumer is under significant pressure," he said. TFG completed a number of acquisitions in the past two years including Whistles in the UK. Murray said "further acquisitions would never be entirely off the cards as long as there were good opportunities about". In the year to March 2017, TFG said turnover for TFG Africa was up 8%, with comparable sales growth of 2.8%. TFG Africa is the retailer’s operations on the African continent. TFG International reported turnover growth of 45% in sterling. Kagiso Asset Management associate portfolio manager Simon Anderssen said it was concerning that comparable store sales declined from 3.7% over the nine months of the financial year to just 0.2% in the fourth quarter. Buss said the like-for-like sales for the second half of the retailer’s 2017 financial year were all the more concerning as the figures were for before the cabinet reshuffle and the ratings downgrades, which had affected consumer confidence. Anderssen said a positive from the group’s results was that costs had remained "relatively well managed" and had benefited from lower debtor costs. However, the outlook for the company was not optimistic. "Trading clearly slowed after Christmas and it’s reasonable to expect that it slowed further from April because of weaker consumer confidence related to domestic politics and the sovereign bond rating downgrade," he said. Sanlam Private Wealth investment analyst Renier de Bruyn said despite TFG achieving better sales growth than peers over recent years, cash conversion had been much weaker. "This is as a result of aggressive space growth and slower inventory turn given its mix of merchandise. Management has emphasised sales growth in the past, but will likely aim to improve cash flow over the next few years," he said. Buss said it was pleasing to see that the business continued to generate cash, up 27% to R3.3bn in the period under review. Net bad debts also decreased 5.4% — a combination of a slowdown in new accounts and "very good credit management by TFG". "While the inflation outlook is improving, which will improve consumers disposable income, higher taxes and deteriorating consumer confidence post the cabinet reshuffle and ratings downgrades will see retailers revenues come under further pressure," he said. "We think the results of retailers are going to get worse over the coming months," Buss said. Murray said it was unlikely that the trading conditions would improve soon. "But we have a very innovative team here and great management." Murray, whose contract has been extended to at least the end of the 2018 financial year, said TFG was building a business of scale. "I will be here until the end of this coming financial year. If I leave then, or even now, I would be happy with what we have done," Murray said. "At TFG we look quite far into the future and we are setting the group up to have fantastic success in the years to come".