The departure of CEO Thabo Dloti at Liberty was over disagreements on what to prioritise amid its difficulties and the speed of execution, chairman Jacko Maree said. “[Liberty] is not performing at the level it should be. The pressure from the board on the executives is about getting stuff fixed quickly. There was a difference of opinion in terms of how quickly we should be moving,” Maree said on Tuesday. It was a mutually agreed separation,” he said. David Munro, CE at Standard Bank’s corporate and investment banking (CIB) unit, will replace Dloti. Standard Bank holds a 54% share in Liberty. Munro, who has headed CIB since 2011, will be handing a business easily five to 10 times larger than Liberty to his deputy, Kenny Fihla. Asked why a career banker was appointed to head an insurer, Maree said much of what had been under discussion, such as getting products out faster, were leadership and management challenges, not actuarial or technical issues. Banking and insurance were not that different, he said. “Bruce Hemphill’s tenure was a great success,” Maree said, referring to Liberty’s former CEO, who came from Standard Bank. Hemphill, now Old Mutual CEO, had headed wealth and insurance at the bank. Dloti’s resignation comes after a 39% plunge in Liberty’s earnings in 2016 when it suffered withdrawals from its retirement annuity book and a spike in disability and critical-illness claims. Life insurers have suffered retirement-fund withdrawals and disability claims amid high unemployment. Moreover, Liberty has not diversified away from the middle-to upper-income market, a limited pool that is fiercely contested by life insurers and asset managers. “[While] external conditions were difficult, we could have reacted sooner to market trends and developments and better managed certain operational issues,” Maree said. Liberty’s performance shaved about 5% (R1.5bn) off Standard Bank’s 2016 earnings. This led to a 10-point action plan, announced in March and based on closer co-operation between the two. Munro was a “deeply experienced manager who … can restore Liberty to its former glory”, Maree said. None of Liberty’s younger leaders were “ready to step into the hot seat”. Liberty’s previously “deep succession plan” had been challenged by the departure of Hemphill and his deputy, Steven Braudo, he said. Munro had an “excellent track record”, having turned around Standard Bank’s CIB unit, said Adrian Cloete, a portfolio manager at PSG Wealth. Dloti had a remarkably strategic mind, said a former Liberty employee. “[Perhaps] the implementation of that strategic thinking took longer than shareholders could stomach.” Liberty, trading at a 25% discount to its embedded value, ended 3.35% higher at R114.50 a share on Tuesday. The change takes effect immediately. Dloti had been Liberty CEO for a little over three years.