The Impala Platinum (Implats) share price fell as much as 12% on Thursday after the world’s second-largest platinum producer unveiled plans to raise about $400m in a convertible bond to replace a similar bond due in February 2017, instead of adding billions of rand of debt to its balance sheet. Implats has a $200m convertible bond and a R2.67bn convertible bond due in 2017. While the company has undrawn debt facilities of about R4bn in place to repay these bonds, it opted to approach the market with a dollar and rand convertible bond repayable in 2022 to replace the existing bond without putting debt on its balance sheet in an uncertain market. The news sent the shares price tumbling 12% before closing 9.77% lower at R37.50, despite some analysts saying that the decision was a positive one for the company in a  weak and uncertain platinum price environment. Goldman Sachs said on Thursday, that despite boosting Implats’s interest costs by R140m, the decision removed "any near-term balance sheet risk". Implats had approached bondholders to test the appetite to replace the existing bond and found a large degree of support for the measure, which protected its balance sheet by not adding debt to it in an uncertain operating environment and weak global platinum market, spokesman Johan Theron said. The coupon for the new dollar bond, which will raise up to $300m, and the rand bond, which will raise up to R2.6bn, will be set after the book building exercise that will test market appetite for the bond. The 2022 rand bond was expected to bear interest of between 6% and 6.75%, while the dollar bond would be in a range of 2.875% to 3.625%. The 2018 rand bond, by comparison, bore interest of 5% and the dollar note 1%. There would be no premium offered to existing bond holders that Implats wants to buy out. The attraction of the new bond for existing holders would be a higher yield than the one issued four years ago. Implats had opted for the convertible bond instead of a normal corporate bond, which would need a credit rating on the business as a standalone entity, a costly and time-consuming exercise, Theron said. Implats was fully funded to bring its new 16 and 20 shafts in