SA’s presence in the global supply of gold continues to diminish, with its dominance as a source of revenue for the country for more than a century a rapidly receding memory. A report from BMI Research, a Fitch Group company, said SA’s gold production would increase to 5.1-million ounces in 2021 from 4.9-million ounces in 2017, but its global contribution would fall to 4.6% from 5.6% in the past five years. It said SA’s gold production would increase due to rising prices, which would improve gold miners’ margins, but growth would be hampered by continuing labour unrest and power shortages. "Major miners in the country continue to scale back operations and look abroad to invest," it said. MINES UNBUNDLED Harmony Gold is investing tens of millions of dollars in Papua New Guinea and is looking for an operating gold mine in Africa or Papua New Guinea. Gold Fields unbundled three of its deep-level gold mines into Sibanye Gold, which itself has invested heavily in platinum in SA and Zimbabwe and is wrapping up a $2.2bn purchase of US palladium and platinum miner Stillwater Mining. World gold production was forecast to rise to 112-million ounces in the next four years from 103-million ounces in 2017, growing an average 2.4% a year compared to 3.1% in the previous five years. The gold price was expected to average $1,250/oz in 2017 and $1,350/oz in 2018, BMI said. DEEPER, OLDER The story of SA’s decline as a gold superpower has been well documented since it lost its top position to China in 2007, the first time it had not been the world’s leading source of gold in more than a century since 1905. The country’s mines, the source of 2-billion ounces of gold, have become deeper, older and more expensive to operate as the overall grade diminishes. It has been steadily overtaken in the past decade by other producers, pushing it down into seventh position. That is after SA’s gold output was at or close to 1,000 tonnes a year in the 1970s, when annual global gold production averaged 1,296tonnes. SA’s gold mines took a severe knock during the power crisis in 2008. This was compounded by safety stoppages, declining productivity, labour unrest, electricity costs and shortages and restrictive laws.