A parliamentary hearing on transformation of the financial sector on Wednesday degenerated into a slanging match that nearly ended in a fist fight. During the heated exchange between Black First Land First national convenor Andile Mngxitama and the chairman of the standing committee on finance, Yunus Carrim, Mngxitama said that Carrim was an Indian who would be removed in the same way that former finance minister Pravin Gordhan was removed. Mngxitama threatened to beat up Carrim after Carrim asked him to apologise for calling his co-chair of the hearings, Joan Fubbs, chairperson of the trade and industry committee, a fascist because she tried to keep him within the predetermined time limits for each speaker. When Mngxitama refused to leave the meeting, Carrim left his chair on the podium to approach him. It was at this point that Mngxitama — who was expelled from the Economic Freedom Fighters — threatened to beat up Carrim and called him "a defender of white monopoly capitalism". Carrim was sanguine and nonchalant about the "unfortunate" incident, saying SA was living in very challenging times in a "very polarised" society. Carrim said he did not have a problem being called a sellout and an agent of white monopoly capital but objected to a struggle veteran being called a fascist. ANC finance committee members Thandi Tobias and Tozama Mantashe took exception to Mngxitama’s racist comments about Carrim. DA finance spokesman David Maynier described the Black First delegation as "Gupta foot soldiers" who came to the committee with cameramen from the Gupta-owned TV channel ANN7 "to provoke with their so-called Malikane proposals". Mngxitama said white monopoly capital was inherently corrupt and antidevelopment, including the banks, and it had also captured MPs in order for them to vote against President Jacob Zuma during the no-confidence debate. The courts were also captured by white monopoly capital and the highly concentrated media industry was very biased towards it. In a statement, Parliament said it "deplored Mr Mngxitama’s appalling behaviour" which it said was in flagrant breach of the open and democratic culture of engagement which it sought to promote.