Coronation’s share price leapt nearly 6% on Tuesday to close at R65.70, as an improved investment performance and plans to stem outflows from its funds gave shareholders cause for optimism. Flows from global retirement funds and the reopening of certain domestic portfolios to institutional investors would offset expected outflows, CEO Anton Pillay said on Tuesday. Outflows were expected to continue, given Coronation’s large market share and in line with overall outflows in the retirement fund space, he said. For the six months to March 2017, Coronation recorded net outflows of R34.6bn, mostly from institutions. Assets under management declined R23bn, buoyed by investment returns, in the period. Overall, assets are down R34bn to R576bn from a September 2015 peak of R610bn. Large active asset managers, such as Coronation, Allan Gray and Old Mutual, are competing with index-tracking products and more nimble entrants with specialised mandates. Meanwhile, stagnant economic growth and job losses have led to enormous withdrawals from retirement funds, while weak equity markets have weighed on investment returns. After years of higher-than-expected inflows, Coronation had elected to close its domestic absolute, balanced and equity portfolios to new institutional clients in 2012 in order to protect its ability to deliver performance for existing clients. Outflows over the previous two years had created space to reopen these strategies to new clients in March, with positive initial responses, Pillay said. While this would help reduce outflows, only about 20% of the pension-fund market was not already a Coronation client when it closed these portfolios to new clients in 2012, said David Talpert, an analyst at Avior Capital Markets. Still, improved investment performance in its funds over the past 18 months boded well for attracting flows. It also increased the likelihood of performance-fee income, which would boost revenue and could partly explain the uplift in the share price, Talpert said. Jaap Meijer, MD of research at Arqaam Capital, pencilled in average management fees of 67 basis points of assets under management, versus a peak of well more than 110 basis points. Arqaam Capital said this was in line with Investec. On its international growth prospects, Pillay said that Coronation was in discussions with the three biggest retirement-fund asset consultants globally and had been placed on “buy lists”. These lists contain asset managers that consultants recommend to retirement funds. These flows could take 12 to 18 months to materialise, but Coronation would continue to build relationships with global asset allocators in the years ahead, Pillay said. Coronation would face stiff competition from global asset managers, but its emerging market fund had an impressive track record, Talpert said. Coronation posted a 6% drop in revenue to R1.9bn for the interim period. After-tax profit fell 5% to R736m on better cost management. Operating expenses slid 9% to R933m as a result of its variable cost model, which includes performance-based pay. “We welcome the improvement in cost structure this half and are positive that reopening some funds could spur inflow growth in the longer term,” Meijer said. Arqaam Capital, which rated the stock a hold, had reduced its target price for the share to R65.50 from R66.40, on expectations of further outflows. 