Singapore — Asian stocks retreated on Thursday, taking their cue from a subdued session on Wall Street, while the dollar retained gains made after the Federal Reserve’s hawkish policy statement. At the end of its two-day meeting, the Fed kept its benchmark interest rate steady as expected, but downplayed weak first-quarter economic growth and emphasised the strength of the labour market, a sign it was still on track for two more rate increases this year. Futures traders are now pricing in a 72% chance of a June rate increase, from 63% before the Fed’s statement, according to the CME Group’s FedWatch Tool. The dollar was slightly higher at ¥112.78, close to the highest since March 20 touched earlier, after surging 0.6% on Wednesday to close at the session high. The dollar index, which tracks the greenback against a basket of trade-weighted peers, climbed 0.1% to 99.323, building on Wednesday’s 0.2% jump. "The key over the coming weeks will be the economic data from the US but, in addition, the [Fed] will be closely watching Washington and negotiations surrounding the new administration’s tax cut plans," said Lee Ferridge, head of multi-asset strategy for North America at State Street Global Markets. "Should the data hold up (or better still, improve from here), while the chances of a late summer tax cut agreement remain intact, then the market will likely price in a June move." Attention now turns to US nonfarm payrolls data for March, due on Friday, after separate data showed private employers added 177,000 jobs in April. That was higher than expected but the smallest increase since October. Economists polled by Reuters expect US private payroll employment probably grew by 185,000 jobs in April, up from 89,000 in March. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan slid 0.5% on Thursday, dragged lower by commodities, energy and financials stocks. Japan is closed for the Golden Week holiday. Chinese stocks were down 0.3%, after growth in China’s services sector cooled to its slowest in almost a year in April as the fear of slower economic growth dented business confidence. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng dropped 0.6%. Australian shares were 0.3% lower. "May is a notoriously cruel month for Asia with foreign exchange, equities and domestic bonds all losing in historical average returns," Bank of America Merrill Lynch strategists led by Claudio Piron wrote in a note. South Korea’s Kospi bucked the weaker trend, jumping 0.6% and hovering just a touch below a record high hit earlier in the session on strong corporate earnings. Overnight, Wall Street closed flat to lower. The Nasdaq fell 0.4% as Apple shares slid after reporting lower than expected iPhone sales on Tuesday. Facebook and Tesla also dropped during the session and after hours despite upbeat quarterly results. Political concerns, which have taken a backseat recently, may re-emerge, with a US House of Representatives vote on a revised bill to repeal Obamacare due later in the session after two failed attempts to corral enough support to pass the legislation. House majority leader Kevin McCarthy said Republican leadership was confident there was enough backing for the bill to pass, after key moderate leaders met President Donald Trump on Wednesday. Even if the bill passes the House, it could face an uphill battle in the Senate. In Europe, Germany ended higher but Britain and France closed lower. The pan-European Stoxx 600 index lost 0.04% to slip from a 20-month high. The euro was steady at $1.0889 early on Thursday, after losing 0.4% on Wednesday. Following a debate between French far-right leader Marine le Pen and centrist Emmanuel Macron, who will face off in the second round of the presidential election on Sunday, a poll showed about 63% of voters found market favourite Macron to be more convincing. In commodities, oil prices slipped on Thursday after a smaller than expected decline in US inventories last week. US crude pulled back 0.25% to $47.69 a barrel. On Wednesday, they touched their lowest level in more than five weeks before closing higher. Global benchmark Brent fell 0.2% to $50.68. Gold inched up 0.2% to $1,240.40/oz, making up some of Wednesday’s 1.5% loss, but the stronger dollar capped gains. Reuters