Global software company SAP admitted on Thursday that its South African arm had paid at least R107m in kickbacks to Gupta-related intermediaries for contracts won from Transnet and Eskom. The admission is now part of a US justice department and US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) investigation, after the company said it had voluntarily handed over information to the authorities. The Federal Bureau of Investigation in the US and the UK’s Serious Fraud Office are also investigating claims of money laundering through bank accounts and various companies connected to the controversial family. SAP executive board member Adaire Fox-Martin, who is responsible for SAP’s business in middle and eastern Europe, the Middle East, Africa and China, said an internal investigation conducted by law firm Baker McKenzie on behalf of SAP had found no evidence of payments to any South African government official and employees of Transnet and Eskom. She said that to date the investigation had shown that between December 2014 and November 2016 SAP concluded two contracts for the sale of software to Transnet and two contracts for Eskom, each with the assistance of an entity that was linked to the Guptas. “In connection with these four contracts, SAP provided software and received revenue totalling approximately R660m, and paid commissions to entities, currently understood to be Gupta-related, totalling approximately R94m. “The amounts actually paid to the third parties totalled approximately R107m because, by contract, each commission payment included an amount of VAT [value added tax] for taxes due on the receipt of the funds,” Fox-Martin said. The investigation was ongoing and SAP committed to making the findings public once it was completed. The company has been embroiled in the Gupta scandal along with other companies, such as consulting firm McKinsey and Trillian Capital Partners, which were all linked to Eskom contracts. Fox-Martin said the Baker McKenzie investigation had uncovered “indications of misconduct” in issues relating to the management of Gupta-related third parties. A tranche of leaked Gupta e-mails shows not only how kickbacks were allegedly paid but also how the Guptas gained access to highly confidential draft contracts between SAP and Eskom. The SAP-Eskom contract valued at R130m was for an SAP management tool that tracks purchasing‚ invoicing and payment documents. The Guptas also managed to obtain a bid by SAP to provide commercial software for use in the South African public service. There were also allegations that CAD House, which is owned by President Jacob Zuma’s son Duduzane, received multimillion-rand kickbacks for helping SAP secure contracts with Transnet. SAP started its investigation into its South African unit in July. In September, the DA laid charges of money laundering and corruption against SAP’s South African subsidiary. The party’s Natasha Mazzone called on Thursday on SAP to now also volunteer this information to the South African Police Service. “Following SAP’s admission … the police have an obligation to investigate fully and to leave no stone unturned,” she said. SAP also announced that it was taking disciplinary action against three employees and that a fourth had been cleared of any wrongdoing. Fox-Martin said the past three months had been “humbling” for the company. “The allegations of wrongdoing in our South African business have had a profound impact on our employees, customers and partners, and on the South African public, and we apologise wholeheartedly for this.” quintalg@businesslive.co.za The media release from global software company SAP's on the ongoing  investigation into its South Africa business: