President Jacob Zuma has confirmed the appointment of the permanent board of the SABC. After almost three weeks of dithering, the presidency announced on Tuesday that 11 members of the board had been appointed for a period of five years, with immediate effect. Zuma has faced increasing pressure from opposition parties and lobby groups to confirm the appointment of the board after the term of the interim board lapsed in September. It had been suggested that Zuma wanted to gain control of the SABC by delaying the announcement of a new board, so that he and Communications Minister Ayanda Dlodlo could place their preferred candidates in executive positions. The board members are: Khanyisile Kweyama, Rachel Kalidass, Dinkwanyane Mohuba, Victor Rambau, Bongumusa Makhathini, Michael Markovitz, Jack Phalane, Mathatha Tsedu, John Matisonn, Krish Naidoo and Febe Potgieter-Gqubule. Former Independent Communications Authority of SA (Icasa) councillor Nomvuyiso Batyi withdrew her application, and Parliament’s portfolio committee on communications will consider the pool of candidates that was interviewed to find a replacement. Zuma has designated Makhathini as chairperson of the board and Potgieter-Gqubule as deputy chairperson. DA MP and communications  spokesperson Phumzile van Damme said the party noted with “grave concern” the appointment of Makhathini and Potgieter-Gqubule, who are close allies to Zuma and his family. “The chairman, Bongumusa Makhathini, is also the chairman of a foundation run by one of President Zuma’s wives, Bongi Ngema-Zuma. His proximity to the Zuma family is a concern. The deputy chairperson, Febe Potgieter-Gqubule, has been a close ally and adviser to Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, with strong political ties to the ANC. During the interviews, she even admitted that there is a possibility that she would resign from the SABC board if she is elected to the ANC NEC [national executive committee],” Van Damme said. “It is obvious that the President wilfully delayed the appointment the permanent SABC board because he wanted certain individuals on the board to serve his own interests, not those of the South African public …. We will be keeping a hawk’s eye on the board’s work.” © Business Day