KPMG SA director Gary Pickering acknowledged before Parliament’s standing committee on public accounts (Scopa) that the KPMG executives who left the firm due to the scandal over work done for the Guptas and SARS, were paid severance packages. In September Trevor Hoole resigned as CEO, and eight other senior executives quit with him, following revelations about the firm’s conduct in its report on the South African Revenue Service “Rogue Unit” — parts of which it withdrew — and its work on Gupta companies including Oakbay. KPMG is being probed by industry watchdog the Independent Regulatory Board of Auditors (Irba). Newly appointed CEO Nhlamulo Dlomu and director Gary Pickering briefed Scopa on Thursday morning. ANC MP Nthabiseng Khunou eventually joined the Scopa hearing — the only ANC committee member in the room. DA Scopa member Tim Brauteseth asked what elements of the rogue unit report to SARS were deemed invalid by KPMG International following an internal review. Pickering said KPMG International did not make findings on the methodology of the report itself but found that of the report’s conclusions, recommendations and legal opinion, only one was found to be reliable, and the rest were unreliable or inconclusive. “They reviewed our methodology in terms of the recommendations, conclusion and legal opinion, and that is what was found to be have been reviewed and found to be unreliable,” said Pickering. After Brauteseth pressed for answers on the exit of former heads at the firm, Pickering admitted packages were paid to some of those who resigned in September, “in the interest of speed”. Brauteseth also took issue with the rapid action which KPMG took amid the reports, saying that it appeared as though the firm was scrambling to mask wrongdoing from the public. “Why are you so suspiciously generous? Do the findings against the recommendations, conclusion and legal opinion make the entire report worthless? Have packages been paid to the persons listed who resigned?” said Brauteseth. Reforms Dlomu said KPMG had resolved to co-operate with the inquiry by the Independent Regulatory Board of Auditors, and that the firm was not looking to obscure the view of what took place during the production of its report. “This is not window dressing. The reason we are calling for an independent inquiry is to establish facts,” she said. “The amounts that we pay back will be of help to communities and we view it as a start to reparation.” Dlomu promised to make sweeping changes to ensure the firm did not repeat the “greatly disappointing” work it did for the Guptas and SARS Dlomu said an announcement would be made in the coming days about an independent inquiry into its work at firms owned by the Guptas. “I have personally been greatly disappointed by how far we have fallen short of the standards we set ourselves,” Dlomu told Scopa. “I am determined that these mistakes do not happen again, which is why we have already made a number of changes. I am leading other reforms.” Dlomu said any person found by the investigation to have failed to do their job would be held accountable. She said the changes would also strengthen governance and ensure decision-making was more centralised. With Reuters