Re-engineered industrial conglomerate enX Group — with interests in industrial equipment, fleet management, power generation, logistics and petrochemicals — achieved its performance guidance of adjusted headline earnings of 181c a share for the year to end-August. An assessment of a comparative performance is difficult since this is the first full-year results for enX after incorporating the industrial equipment and fleet management businesses acquired from Eqstra. The holding in unprofitable mining services business eXtract was also unbundled after financial year-end. But the market warmed to the results, with enX’s share hitting an intraday high of R14.50. before falling back to close at R14 — up 1.08% on the day. The income statement showed revenue at R6.2bn, with operating profit at R673m, at a margin of 10.8%. Cash flow from operations – after capital expenditure – came in at R256m, which is equivalent to about 165c per share. For executive deputy chairman Paul Mansour, who will replace CEO Jannie Serfontein at the end of March 2018, the results showed enX’s earnings potential. He said the group continued to generate strong annuity income flows, with about R4bn of revenue generated on a contract basis. “Our main focus has been on becoming a pure industrial play … the financial year ahead will see us continuing to improve our efficiencies in our operations, which is critical in a low-growth environment.” Mansour said it was unlikely enX would chase any large deals in the near term, but instead would be on the lookout for smaller, bolt-on acquisitions. He reckoned more ambitious transactions would probably only be tackled once enX’s share rerated to the levels of its industrial sector peers, allowing the company to issue scrip to pay for acquisitions. A divisional review showed the equipment businesses generating R3bn in revenue and R197m in adjusted profit before tax with year-on-year growth reported in the forklift market and market shares maintained. The fleet division managed R1.65bn in revenue and R181m in adjusted profit before tax, with Mansour reporting a stabilising leasing book after multiple years of decline. The petrochemicals segment posted revenue of R1.5bn and adjusted profit before tax of R77m, with production volumes in lubricants increasing. Looking ahead, Mansour believed the industrial equipment division was expected to deliver annualised earnings growth driven by the UK operations. He said the Southern African forklift operations and the wood and power businesses were also expected to deliver solid performances. Mansour said the full maintenance leasing segment was expected to show annualised earnings growth. “The overriding objective over the next 24 months is to increase retention rates and new business.” enX’s lubricant business was recently awarded ExxonMobil’s lubricant blending rights for its strategic global accounts. Mansour estimated that this was expected to commence in the second half of 2018. He said supportive conditions in the polymers market were expected to drive higher volume and profitability in the lubricants segment. hasenfussm@fm.co.za 