ArcelorMittal SA CEO Wim de Klerk is retiring from the group at the end of January 2018 after less than 18 months at the helm. He joined the steel producer in September 2016. The struggling company has churned CEs in recent years as it struggles to adapt to structural changes in the global steel markets and government policy decisions at home. De Klerk told Business Day on Tuesday he had for some time indicated to the board that he wanted to retire. “This has been a personal decision to make a complete lifestyle change, for myself and my family,” he said. “I have given an adequate notice period — three months — which will provide sufficient time to position my successor and ensure a seamless hand-over. Also, there are some very strong technical people in the senior management team who will continue to support the new CEO,” De Klerk said. The board says it will immediately implement a process to identify a suitable successor. “On behalf of the board, we would like to thank Wim for his leadership of the company during this challenging period,” ArcelorMittal SA chairman Mpho Makwana said. “We have made some important progress notably with regard to the implementation of safeguards on some products to support the sustainability of the domestic industry.” Lakshmi Mittal, chairman and CEO of the global ArcelorMittal group headquartered in Luxembourg said: “I would also like to thank Wim for his efforts and commitment. ArcelorMittal remains fully committed to the South African business, which is integral to our strategy for the African continent.” Percy Takunda, mining and resources analyst at Momentum Securities, said the exchange rate would be a key determinant of the group’s final results to December 2017. “A strong rand is bad, weaker is good,” he said. ArcelorMittal SA management had emphasised the need for government intervention to save jobs in SA’s struggling steel industry, he said. The group had recently said that with the poor economy and continuing imports of cheaper Chinese steel, it had no option but to review staffing levels. In reporting a total comprehensive loss of R2.46bn in the six months to June 2017, the group said Eskom and Transnet pricing had made it uncompetitive. At the time, De Klerk said the company appreciated the steps taken by the government to protect the steel industry, such as import duties and the localisation of steel for infrastructure projects. The group’s export sales had been hampered by weak international prices, rand volatility and rising input costs, he said. “We do not believe that the outlook is likely to change in the foreseeable future, especially with regard to the lack of investment in infrastructure development,” De Klerk said. allixm@bdfm.co.za