The DA has resolved its differences with the coalition partners that helped it oust the ANC in 2016’s elections in Nelson Mandela Bay, Johannesburg and Tshwane, says the party’s leader Mmusi Maimane. "Coalitions are a lot like marriage. They are far from perfect, take a lot of hard work and often hit stumbling blocks due to miscommunication. But they are vital in bringing about change and removing the ANC from governance across the country," Maimane said on Sunday at a media briefing on the outcome of the party’s last federal council meeting for the year. The party’s hold on power in the metros has been bedevilled by infighting, personality clashes and disagreement on policies. At one stage, the coalition in Nelson Mandela Bay looked on the brink of collapse, but Maimane said the coalition was now on an even keel and all the partners were back on board. United Democratic Movement (UDM) leader Bantu Holomisa said that the picture sketched by Maimane was broadly correct. "We passed the budget [and] officials are implementing it. The minor hiccup between the DA and expelling the UDM deputy mayor [Mongameli Bobani] is under review by the courts, but the coalition is continuing." Bobani was axed as Nelson Mandela Bay deputy mayor two months ago after 60 councillors voted for a motion of no confidence in him. Maimane said that the DA’s partnership with the EFF in Tshwane and Johannesburg had also stabilised. "The EFF are back in council and supporting our pro-poor agenda in those governments." EFF spokesman Mbuyiseni Ndlozi, however, described a more arms-length relationship: "The DA must never confuse our fight for the elimination of the kleptocratic ANC to mean we embrace their economic liberalism and Eurocentrism.... We have no intentions, now and in the future, of being in any coalition with them ... without a radical acceptance of the socialist and pan-Africanist socio-economic agenda of the EFF, whose point of departure is land expropriation," he said. Coalitions are vitally important to the DA in its quest to wrest control from the ANC at provincial level in the 2019 national elections. Maimane said two new policies were tabled for discussion at this weekend’s federal council meeting, one focused on fighting corruption, the other dealing with what the party termed the "opportunity ladder" from cradle to career. "At the centre of these policy ideas is a concrete plan to put an end to the cancer of corruption in government and to ensure that we create opportunity and jobs for the millions of South Africans currently without hope," he said. kahnt@businesslive.co.za