Mineral Resources Minister Mosebenzi Zwane faces a second challenge to set aside the controversial Mining Charter, with a large group of communities making an urgent application for intervention to be heard in December. The Chamber of Mines won the first round in the battle against the third version of the charter after Zwane suspended its implementation until after the review of the document by a full bench of judges on December 13 and 14. The Centre for Applied Legal Studies said it was launching the application to intervene in the case because communities were not consulted by Zwane and his department in drawing up the charter. The chamber is arguing for the review in part because it felt it had not been adequately consulted before the charter was gazetted in mid-June, knocking R51bn off listed mining companies’ capitalisation. The centre’s application was brought on behalf of Mining Affected Communities United in Action‚ Women Affected by Mining United in Action and the Mining and Environmental Justice Network of SA, which together represent about 150 activists and community-based organisations. The application was brought to demand communities’ rights to administrative action in terms of the Constitution and the Promotion of Administration Justice Act, said Mesheck Mbangula, chairman of Mining Affected Communities United in Action. When he launched the charter in mid-June, Zwane said his department had consulted widely and interacted with 60 groups in compiling the document. However, these community groups said that despite their best efforts they had no input in drawing up the charter. Mbangula said the department’s "failure to meaningfully engage with mining-affected communities and other relevant stakeholders such as women, mine employees and mining federations" was a contravention of the Constitution. "We cannot align ourselves with the Chamber of Mines because mining companies themselves have failed in their own processes to include mining-affected communities as stakeholders in mining," he said. The chamber, whose members mine 90% of SA’s annual mineral production, does not want the groups to intervene in its increasingly heated battle with Zwane. "The chamber has opposed [Centre for Applied Legal Studies] joining the hearing of the chamber’s review application, given that their intervention is way out of time for the chamber application, their grounds for review differ substantially," said Tebello Chabana, the chamber’s senior executive of public affairs and transformation. "And the chamber fears that this would significantly delay the process. For these reasons, the chamber is of the view that [the centre] should approach the court with its own application. They are entitled to do so." The chamber will argue that the charter is unconstitutional because it does not recognise the separation of powers and seeks to "legislate through the back door", while the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act does not allow the minister to make the changes he did. It will argue that the charter contravenes the Promotion to Administrative Justice Act and is a policy document, not law. The charter requires that black ownership of mining firms increase to 30% from 26% within 12 months and that they pay empowerment partners 1% from the revenue line, putting them ahead of creditors and other shareholders. After 10 years, mining companies would have to write off any debt remaining in empowerment structures. seccombea@bdfm.co.za