South African Post Office CEO Mark Barnes has insisted Sapo is ready and able to help the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) with grant payments from April next year. Barnes’s remarks to a joint committee meeting of Parliament’s standing committee on public accounts (Scopa) and the portfolio committee on social development contradicted remarks Minister of Social Development Bathabile Dlamini made in East London on Monday regarding the Sapo’s readiness. Tuesday’s joint meeting followed at least two unsuccessful attempts to get Dlamini to update Parliament on Sassa’s progress in complying with a Constitutional Court order ruling out Cash Paymaster Services from facilitating the grant payments in future. Dlamini previously said there were a number of criteria Sapo did not meet to qualify to facilitate the payment of the 17-million grants.  However, on the issue of Sapo’s lack of a full banking licence, Barnes said: “We can settle transactions. Standard Bank is our clearing blank to clear transactions. There are 218 categories of fulfilment. Only eight categories were requirements not met. We will contest six and regard two as not applicable. “If you go back to school 90% is a pass, not a fail.” Barnes said Sapo, at optimum performance, could produce up to 2-million cards a week if needed, and would be able to replace cards at a cost of over R400m, which it would be able to recover overtime. Dlamini said she was taken aback by the update, as initial indications were that the Post Office would not be able to take on the function on its own, referring to early talks between Sassa and Sapo.  “It will assist us to give the committee the response of the Post Office to the request for proposal. Some of the things the CEO is talking about here are not in their response. We could not anticipate that they would be able to do some of these things,” said Dlamini. Scopa chairman Thembi Godi said the two committees would give the parties until Wednesday evening to update them on a for the Post Office to replace Cash Paymaster Services next year. “We should lay this matter to rest one way or the other today. We can’t be dealing with the same matter again and again. We need to find finality or else it would not be correct and justified,” said Godi.